ALL RIGHT,
WELCOME TO THE WEDNESDAY,
FEBRUARY 19TH, TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE REGULAR MEETING THE ANN
ARBOR PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
DETAILED INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES PLEASE REVIEW THE
FULL PRINTED MEETING AGENDA
PROVIDED MR. LETTER, WILL YOU
PLEASE CALL ROLL COMMISSIONER?
I'M HERE COMMISSIONER WAITZ
HERE.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
WHICH COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT.
>> COMMISSIONER EVANS HERE.
COMMISSIONER DISH HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE
HERE.
COMMISSIONER ADAM SILVER
COMMISSIONER NORTON HERE.
>> THANK YOU.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER BILL SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR SAY AY AY AY YI
OPPOSED YOU KNOW THE MOTION
PASSES ME I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE
JANUARY TWENTY THREE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE MOVE BY A COUNCIL
MEMBER OF DISH SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER.
>> WHETHER IT BE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR SAY I ONLY OPPOSED THE
MOTION PASSES WE'RE GOING TO
MOVE RIGHT ON TO REPORTS FROM
CITY ADMINISTRATION AND CITY
MANAGER.
SO WE WILL FIRST START WITH
COUNCIL DISH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH CHAIR
LEE.
VERY EXCITING NEWS LAST NIGHT
ROBERTSON HOLMES ANNEXATION
OF THE SIX POINT THREE ACRES
THAT WILL PROVIDE A MUCH NEEDED
A MUCH SNEEZING HOUSING APOLOGY
DID GO THROUGH THE STREET
VACATION FOR CORNWELL PLACE
ALSO DONE AND PASSED ON FIRST
READING IS IS THE HICKORY WEIGH
THREE PROJECT OTHERWISE KNOWN
AS ELEVEN FORTY SIX SOUTH MAPLE
.
SO THAT'S FIRST READING.
IT'LL COME BACK WITH A SLIGHT
PLAN AND THAT WILL ALSO I'M
PRETTY SURE PASS BECAUSE WHO
DOESN'T WANT ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> GREAT THANK YOU MANAGER
LEONARD ALSO LAST NIGHT ONE
WELL PLACE PERSON HOW HE DID
I'M SORRY I MISSED THAT MY
APOLOGIES I SHOULD I SHOULD
HAVE KNOWN BETTER.
MY APOLOGIES.
I'LL LEAVE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
THERE WAS AN EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE MEETING IF CHARLIE
WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS THAT WHEN
YOU GET TO OTHER MEMBERS I DO
WANT TO DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO
THERE IS AN ADDITIONAL
CORRESPONDENCE THAT WE RECEIVED
AFTER PACKET DEADLINE SO THAT
WAS PRINTED OUT AND PUT AT YOUR
TABLE.
I ALSO WANT TO DRAW YOUR
ATTENTION IN THE COMMUNICATION
PACKET.
THERE'S A LOT OF CONVERSATION
WITH THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN AT THE LAST ADOPTION TIME
SO WE THOUGHT IT WAS A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY TO PROVIDE SOME
ADDITIONAL FOLLOW UP ON SOME
OF THE TOPICS THAT RECEIVED THE
MOST ATTENTION FOR A LITTLE BIT
MORE CONTEXT AND WE'D LIKE TO
SCHEDULE A WORK SESSION WITH
YOU IN APRIL.
>> SO WE'VE PROVIDED SOME
OF THE INFORMATION OR SORT
OF OUR BEST INTERPRETATION
OF SOME OF THE QUESTIONS THAT
CAME UP DURING THAT DISCUSSION.
SOME ACTIONS THAT WE'VE TAKEN
FOR EXAMPLE AND RECALIBRATING
OUR RECORDKEEPING SO THAT IF
THE PLANNING COMMISSION WANTS
TO IDENTIFY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS THAT CAN BE A SOURCE
OF ORIGINATION.
I DO WANT TO DRAW YOUR
ATTENTION TO THAT FOR THE MOST
WELL-ROUNDED DISCUSSION LIKE IF
YOU COULD SHARE ANY INFORMATION
OR QUESTIONS OR REQUEST THE
TOPICS THAT YOU WOULD LIKE TO
SPECIFICALLY DISCUSS IF YOU
COULD SHARE THAT WITH US BY
MARCH 11TH, YOU CAN PROVIDE
THAT TO EITHER ME TO DEPUTY
MANAGER KELLEY OR EVEN JUST TO
THE PLANNING AND BOX.
WE'LL COMPILE ALL THOSE SO THAT
KAYLA AND GET AND WE CAN HAVE
THE APPROPRIATE STAFF READY FOR
THAT DISCUSSION IN APRIL.
I'M ALSO RELATED TO WORKING
SESSIONS CURRENTLY WE HAVE NO
TOPICS SCHEDULED FOR THE MARCH
11 WORKING SESSION.
SO IF THERE ARE HOT TOPICS THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION WOULD
LIKE TO DUST OFF FROM YOUR
VANTAGE POINT WE'RE HAPPY TO
ENTERTAIN THOSE OPTIONS AS
WELL.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
I'LL GIVE A QUICK UPDATE ON OUR
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEETING.
WE TALKED ABOUT THE RETREAT
THAT WE HAVEN'T DONE IN
ACTUALLY SEVERAL YEARS AND THEN
ONE WHAT WE TALKED ABOUT WAS
ACTUALLY VISITING SOME OF THE
SITES THAT WE'VE PASSED JUST TO
SEE HOW FEELS WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT DO WE RIDE BIKES?
DO WE GET BUS, ET CETERA.
BUT IT'LL BE DONE KIND OF WHEN
IT'S NICER BUT IT'S FOR US TO
GET A FEEL FOR ESSENTIALLY
WHERE THE CONFLICT POINTS AND
WHAT'S ACCRETIVE TO THE OVERALL
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> SO I THINK IT'S GOING TO BE
A GOOD TIME FOR US TO BOND BUT
ALSO TO TAKE A SERIOUS LOOK AT
WHAT DOES THIRTY SIX FEET FEEL
LIKE
AND JUST AND THEN ALSO TO
SAY HEY, FOR THOSE OF US THAT
HAD DISSENTING VOTES FOR
EXAMPLE ON S FOREST OR ON
CHURCH ON SOMETHING THAT'S
FIFTEEN OR SEVENTEEN STORIES,
WHAT DOES IT FEEL LIKE RIGHT
NOW?
>> AND SO THAT'S ULTIMATELY
WHAT WE TALKED ABOUT AND IT
SHOULD BE A GOOD TIME FOR US TO
GET TOGETHER.
>> I BELIEVE IT WAS GOING TO BE
DURING THE WEEK.
SO WE WILL BE REACHING I THINK
TO SET UP SOME DATES BECAUSE WE
WILL ACTUALLY HAVE SOME
OF THESE STAFF THERE AS WELL TO
KIND OF LIKE GUIDE US THROUGH.
THESE ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT WE SEE FOR WASTE REMOVAL
FIRE, ET CETERA.
>> SO OK WITH THAT ANY OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS FROM OTHER
MEMBERS OK SEEING NONE.
>> OK WE WILL WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS ARE INCLUDED IN
TODAY'S PACKET.
>> WE WILL MOVE ON TO OUR FIRST
PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
THREE MINUTES ON AN ISSUE
THAT'S NOT LISTED AS A TOPIC
HERE TODAY WE'LL FIRST HEAR
FROM THOSE PRESENT AND THEN
THOSE REMOTE CALLERS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
IF ON THE PHONE OR USE THE
PHRASE HAND FEATURE IF ON ZOOME
FOR PHONE ACCESS PLEASE CALL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
THEN MEETING ID NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
CALL IDENTIFY CALLERS FOR THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME FOR ZOOME
USERS AND YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK AND
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE DO WE
HAVE ANY PRESENT I WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK THE SAME.
OH ALL RIGHT.
SEEING NONE.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY CALLERS ROBO
CALLS BUT NOBODY INDICATING A
DESIRE TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION COVID YOU MORE
SECONDS.
OK, WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON.
>> THANKS.
WELL WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO
CLOSE THE FIRST PUBLIC COMMENT.
YOU WILL HAVE A CHANCE TO SPEAK
AT THE END OF THE MEETING AS
WELL.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC HEARING SCHEDULED FOR
THE NEXT BUSINESS MEETING.
>> MR. LEONARD?
YES.
YOU HAVE THREE NEW PUBLIC
HEARINGS SCHEDULED FOR THE
MARCH 4TH TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
MEETING THE FIRST ONE IS TWELVE
ZERO NINE S UNIVERSITY AVENUE.
THIS IS A PROPOSED SITE PLAN TO
CONSTRUCT A NEW NINETEEN STOREY
MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
WITH GROUND FLOOR RETAIL NINETY
POINT THREE NINE ACRE SITE
SONDES ONE THE PROPOSED
DEVELOPMENT INCLUDES DEMOLITION
OF THE EXISTING RETAIL
BUILDINGS AND RECONSTRUCTION
OF THE PEDESTRIAN CORRIDOR
ALONG CHURCH STREET AND SOUTH
UNIVERSITY AVENUE.
>> THE SITE IS LOCATED IN ONE
SECOND IS THREE FOUR THREE
SOUTH FIFTH YOU MIGHT KNOW IT
AS THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY THIS IS
A PROPOSED REZONING FROM PUBLIC
LAND TO ONE ZONING TO PURSUE A
FUTURE PUBLIC PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT.
>> NO DEVELOPMENT IS CURRENTLY
PROPOSED THIS IS JUST
CONSIDERING REZONING.
IT IS A ONE POINT TWO ONE ACRE
SITE INCLUDING THE LIBRARY
BUILDING AND THE ADJACENT
SURFACE PARKING.
THE SITE IS LOCATED IN WARD
FIVE AND THEN FINALLY TO THREE
TO FIVE CRYSTAL WAY.
THIS IS A PROPOSED REZONING
FROM OUR FORAY TO PUBLIC LAND
ZONING.
THE LAW WAS RECENTLY ACQUIRED
BY THE CITY FOR AN EXPANSION
OF THE HICKORY NATURE AREA
LOCATED IN WARD ONE.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
ALL RIGHT.
REGULAR BUSINESS.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
THIS IS TWO ONE FIVE DASH TWO
REGULAR BUSINESS.
ONE SEVEN SOUTH MAIN STREET
THIS IS TWO ONE FIVE DASH TWO
SITE PLAN FOR CITY PLANNING
ONE SEVEN SOUTH MAIN STREET
COMMISSION APPROVAL.
SITE PLAN FOR CITY PLANNING
THIS IS A PROPOSAL TO ADD
COMMISSION APPROVAL.
THIRTY FIVE HUNDRED TWENTY FOUR
THIS IS A PROPOSAL TO ADD
SQUARE FOOT ADDITION TO THE
THIRTY FIVE HUNDRED TWENTY FOUR
REAR OF A SEVENTEEN THOUSAND
SQUARE FOOT ADDITION TO THE
SQUARE FOOT OR SEVENTEEN
REAR OF A SEVENTEEN THOUSAND
THOUSAND TWENTY SQUARE FOOT
SQUARE FOOT OR SEVENTEEN
THREE STOREY DOWNTOWN IN MIXED
THOUSAND TWENTY SQUARE FOOT
USE BUILDING THE PROJECT WILL
THREE STOREY DOWNTOWN IN MIXED
MAINTAIN TWO GROUND FLOOR
USE BUILDING THE PROJECT WILL
COMMERCIAL SPACES SIXTY EIGHT
MAINTAIN TWO GROUND FLOOR
SEVENTY NINE SQUARE FEET AND
COMMERCIAL SPACES SIXTY EIGHT
AND ADD EIGHT TWO BEDROOM
SEVENTY NINE SQUARE FEET AND
RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT UNITS
AND ADD EIGHT TWO BEDROOM
SAME SIZE EIGHTY SIX HUNDRED
RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT UNITS
TWENTY THREE SQUARE FEET ON THE
SAME SIZE EIGHTY SIX HUNDRED
SECOND AND THIRD FLOORS THIS IS
TWENTY THREE SQUARE FEET ON THE
D ONE DOWNTOWN CORE ZONING MAIN
SECOND AND THIRD FLOORS THIS IS
STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT WARD
D ONE DOWNTOWN CORE ZONING MAIN
FIVE WE'RE GOING TO MOVE FIRST
STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT WARD
MOVE WITH THE PETITIONER
FIVE WE'RE GOING TO MOVE FIRST
PRESENTATION AND WE HAVE JOE
MOVE WITH THE PETITIONER
MAINARD HERE WITH WASHOE
PRESENTATION AND WE HAVE JOE
ENGINEERING
.
>> THANK YOU.
CAN YOU HEAR ME OK?
YES, WE CAN.
>> THANK YOU.
SO THIS PROJECT IS REUSE AS YOU
NOTED OF AN EXISTING BUILDING
DOWNTOWN.
THE GENERAL CONTRACTOR SAM KEFI
AND OWNER REPRESENTATIVE IS
ONLINE WITH US FOR QUESTIONS
LATER ALONG WITH THE ARCHITECT
CHRIS FROM BIG DESIGN IS
AVAILABLE AS WELL.
>> JUST A BRIEF HISTORY OF THIS
PROJECT GONE THROUGH THE DC FOR
THE EXTERIOR RENOVATIONS.
THE FACADE OF THE BUILDING IS
BEING MAINTAINED JUST THE WAY
IT WAS WITH NEW WINDOWS MEETING
THE DC REQUIREMENTS THE FRONT
DOORWAYS AS YOU MENTIONED THE
REAR OF THE BUILDING IS GETTING
IN ADDITION TO PROVIDE FOR
STAIRCASES AND ADDITIONAL
RESIDENTIAL LIVING SPACES.
THE UTILITIES WITHIN THE MAIN
STREET HAVE ACTUALLY ALREADY
BEEN BROUGHT IN.
WHEN THE CITY DID THE WATER
MAIN PROJECT THEY ALREADY
BROUGHT THE UTILITIES IN SO WE
DON'T HAVE TO TEAR UP MAIN
STREET AGAIN FOR WATER
UTILITIES BUT THE VAULTS IN THE
FRONT WILL BE FILLED IN
ACCORDING TO THE DDA
REQUIREMENTS, THE PROJECT HAS A
LONG LIST OF SUSTAINABLE
PRODUCTS OR BENEFITS TO THIS.
THE ROOF IS SOLAR ALREADY
THOUGH IT'S NOT ENOUGH NEARLY
ENOUGH SPACE ON THE ROOF TO
PROVIDE ENOUGH SOLAR FOR THE
PROJECT.
ALL OF THESE REQUIREMENTS I
DON'T KNOW IF YOU WANT TO GO
THROUGH THEM ALL OR NOT BUT ALL
WERE APPROVED BY THE HTC AS
PART OF THE PROJECT.
THEY'RE SO WE'D BE HAPPY TO
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS REGARDING
THAT.
BUT YEAH, AS YOU MENTIONED,
IT'S A NEW RETAIL SPACE WITH
EIGHT APARTMENTS ABOVE IT SO I
GUESS I'LL LEAVE IT REALLY
SHORT AND WE CAN ASK QUESTIONS
IF YOU GOT THEM GOT THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO MOVE TO
STAFF PRESENTATION MANAGER
LEONARD.
GOOD EVENING.
I I WANT TO PREFACE THIS BY THE
PLANNER WHO WAS WORKING ON THIS
WAS UNFORTUNATELY NOT ABLE TO
JOIN US BECAUSE SHE WAS FEELING
ILL TODAY.
SO I DON'T PROFESS TO BE AN
EXPERT FOR SOME REASON WE CAN'T
ADDRESS ONE OF YOUR QUESTIONS.
WE BE HAPPY TO FOLLOW.
BUT AS NOTED, THIS IS A PRETTY
CUT AND DRY SITE PLAN FROM FROM
MY PERSPECTIVE TO START STAFF
IS RECOMMENDING APPROVAL OF THE
SITE PLAN.
WE REFERENCE THE APPROPRIATE
DATA THAT THAT AND NO
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT IS
REQUIRED BASED ON THE NATURE
OF THE SITE PLAN.
THERE ARE NO OTHER EXTERNAL
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WOULD MANDATE
THAT NECESSITY.
>> THE THE PROJECT WAS
DESCRIBED IT'S A THREE STORY
ADDITION THAT'S GOING TO
MAINTAIN TWO GROUND FLOOR
RETAIL SPACES AND EIGHT
RESIDENTIAL TWO BEDROOM
APARTMENTS UP ABOVE IT IS FOR
THOSE WHO DIDN'T GET A CHANCE
TO GO BUY YOU.
IT'S FEATURED AS A PLYWOOD WALL
RIGHT NOW IN THE MIDDLE OF MAIN
STREET.
THE THE PROJECT I WOULD NOTE
ONE DISTINCTION ARE NOT A
DISTINCTION BUT JUST SORT OF A
NOTE ABOUT THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT ORIGINALLY A LARGER
PROJECT WAS APPROVED AT THAT
LOCATION BY THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT COMMISSION.
THE PETITIONER SUBSEQUENTLY
MODIFIED THE PROJECT TO A MUCH
SMALLER SCALE SO THAT
MODIFICATION WAS APPROVED BY
STAFF FOR THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
PERMIT.
THAT'S WHY YOU MIGHT NOT HAVE
SEEN THE SPECIFIC VERSION
OF THIS PROJECT AT A HISTORIC
DISTRICT COMMISSION IF YOU'RE
GOING BACK AND DOING ANY
RESEARCH, THE SITE DOESN'T HAVE
ANY STORMWATER RIGHT NOW
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OR
GETTING FIRST FLUSH PROTECTION
AS PART OF THIS AND THIS
IMPROVEMENT.
SO WHICH IS YOU KNOW, IN A VERY
TIGHT PROJECT SUCH AS THIS
WITHOUT A LOT OF GROUND AREA TO
TO DO MUCH MORE TO, THAT'S A
GREAT OUTCOME.
SO WITH THAT I'LL DO MY BEST TO
ADDRESS ANY QUESTIONS ALONG
WITH THE PETITIONER AND AS
NOTED BY CITY ARCHITECTS ONLINE
AS WELL, IF YOU HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
ON TO A PUBLIC HEARING THIS IS
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THE PUBLIC
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON THIS ITEM.
WE'LL HEAR FROM THOSE PRESENT
AND THEN REMOTE TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
IF ON THE PHONE OR USE A RECENT
FEATURE AND ZOOM IN FOR PHONE
ACCESS, PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND ENTER MEETING ID
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TO DO SIX CITY STAFF
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME ON ZOOM
YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE ENSURE
YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA AND MUTE
ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE PRESENT I
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME.
>> MR. GARBER, GOOD TO SEE YOU
AGAIN, CHARLIE AND EVERYONE I'M
PLANNING COMMISSION.
I HAVE BEEN ABSENT FOR SO LONG
BUT I HAVE MADE A POINT OVER
THE LAST FOUR YEARS TO SHOW UP
EVERY TIME A PETITIONER COMES
IN WITH A PLAN THAT THAT DOES
USE FOSSIL GAS FOR HEATING.
AND I HAVE A COMMENT FIRST
OF ALL ABOUT SORT OF THE
RITUALISTIC ASPECT OF THESE
PRESENTATIONS BY THE
DEVELOPERS.
IT'S ALMOST OBLIGATORY FOR A
DEVELOPER WHO IS ESSENTIALLY
OFFERING NO SUSTAINABILITY
FEATURES AT ALL TO CLAIM THAT
THEY ARE IN THIS CASE.
>> HE CITED THE SOLAR READY
ROOF.
>> I MEAN I LOOKED AT THE
DOCUMENTS A LITTLE WHILE AGO
THE IT READS ALTHOUGH SOLAR
INVESTMENT IS NOT FEASIBLE AT
THIS TIME, PROVISIONS HAVE BEEN
MADE IN THE ROOF DESIGN TO
ALLOW THE INSTALLATION
OF ONSITE SOLAR PANELS ON THE
ROOF IN THE NEAR FUTURE
CONDUITS WILL BE RUN FROM
BASEMENT TO ROOF TO ALLOW WIRE
PULLING FOR FUTURE PANELS
INSTALLATION IN THE NEAR FUTURE
.
>> WHY NOT NOW?
I MEAN I FIND THIS A BIT TOUGH
TO SWALLOW AND IT SOUNDS MORE
LIKE WELL WE'RE PRETENDING
RATHER THAN WE'RE DOING I MEAN
THIS IS A SMALL PROJECT GIVEN
THE FACT THAT
THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS BASICALLY
DISMANTLING THE EPA THE ENERGY
DEPARTMENT, THE INFLATION
REDUCTION ACT I MEAN I FEEL
KIND OF SILLY MAKING A FUSS
OVER THIS PROJECT SO I WANT TO
PUT IT INTO PERSPECTIVE.
BUT IF NOTHING ELSE, LET'S CALL
DEVELOPERS FOR THIS RITUALISTIC
GENUFLECTION TOWARD
SUSTAINABILITY WHEN IN FACT
THEY'RE GIVING US NOTHING AT
ZERO PLAN ADOPTED ON JUNE 1ST.
TWENTY TWENTY SAID THAT'S I
ASSUME THAT STARTING IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO ARE ALL NEW AND
CONSTRUCTION WOULD BE ALL
ELECTRIC AND ACTUALLY CONFORM
IN THAT ZERO STANDARDS AND I'M
REALISTIC ENOUGH TO KNOW THAT
MOST DEVELOPERS AREN'T GOING TO
COMPLY WITH THIS AND THAT YOU
HAVE NO POWER TO MAKE THEM.
BUT LET'S AT LEAST HAVE SOME
HONESTY AT THE TABLE.
I MEAN THAT'S THE LEAST WE CAN
EXPECT.
SO AGAIN I KEEP THIS ALL IN
PERSPECTIVE.
I'M SURE THIS IS A GOOD
DEVELOPMENT WE CAN USE A
HOUSING.
DR. RAMANI, I WISH YOU WELL IN
YOUR ENDEAVORS DOWNTOWN, BUT
LET'S AT LEAST BE HONEST ABOUT
WHAT WE'RE DOING IT WE'RE NOT
DOING HERE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYBODY ELSE
PRESENT I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS TIME SEE NONE PRESENT.
DO WE HAVE ANY CALLERS NO HANDS
RAISED AT THIS TIME.
>> GOT TO GIVE A FEW MORE
SECONDS.
>> OK WITH THAT WE WILL CLOSE
PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> ALL RIGHT WITH THAT WE ARE
MOVING INTO THE PROPOSED MOTION
WHICH IS THAT ANN ARBOR CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVES
THIS TWO ONE FIVE TWO ONE SEVEN
SOUTH MAIN STREET SITE PLAN
REVISION NUMBER FOUR DATED
JANUARY TWENTY FIRST TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER WEISS AND SECONDED
BY COUNCIL MEMBER DESH.
>> WE ARE IN DISCUSSION.
>> WOULD ANYONE LIKE TO KICK US
OFF
PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD
COMMISSIONER MILLS I WAS TRYING
TO LOOK AND SEE WHAT OTHER SITE
AMENITIES ARE BEING PROVIDED.
I NOTED THAT THERE IS BICYCLE
PARKING IN THE FRONT AND IN THE
BACK AND ALSO INSIDE IT APPEARS
THAT THE BICYCLE PARKING INSIDE
IS ON THE GROUND FLOOR.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
THAT IS A STRIP THAT I REALLY
COULD USE SOME MORE PARKING
BIKE PARKING ON MAIN STREET AND
I'M SURE THAT IT'S DONE IN
CONJUNCTION WITH DDA.
YEAH.
SO I THINK THAT IS A GREAT
AMENITY PARTICULARLY FOR AN
ADDITION THAT THE AVERAGE
PERSON WILL NEVER KNOW IS THERE
THAT MAY BE THE ONLY THING THAT
THEY SEE AND THE AND THE WOODEN
BOARDS COMING DOWN ON THE FRONT
SO YEAH I THINK THAT THIS MAKES
SENSE.
>> THANK YOU MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT.
THANK YOU.
I'M JUST I'M I'M UNDER THE
ASSUMPTION THAT THE SECOND AND
THIRD FLOORS CURRENTLY ARE
VACANT.
>> THERE'S NOTHING THERE RIGHT
NOW.
SORRY IF I MISSED THAT AND THE
STAFF REPORT BUT THERE'S THE
WHOLE BUILDING VACANT RIGHT
NOW.
>> OK, OK THAT'S WHAT I THOUGHT
I JUST WANTED TO CONFIRM SO I'M
I'M GLAD THAT THIS WILL ADD
SOME NEW HOUSING DOWNTOWN.
I LIKE THE SIZE OF TWO BEDROOMS
AND I KNOW THAT YOU HAD I DON'T
THINK THAT THERE WAS ANY WAY
AROUND THIS BUT LIKE THOSE
BEDROOMS JUST HAVING THOSE
INTERIOR WINDOWS.
>> OH MAN.
HOPEFULLY PEOPLE WILL BE SO
EXCITED TO LIVE DOWNTOWN THAT
THEY CAN GET OVER THAT.
>> BUT THANK YOU.
>> THANKS FOR THIS HOUSING.
YOU KNOW OK, ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS
ALL RIGHT.
>> THIS BEING OH YES.
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH I'M SORRY I
JUST GOT OUT OF TEACHING AND SO
I'M SCRAMBLING.
I WANTED TO NOTE THAT IN YOUR
SUSTAINABILITY NARRATIVE YOU
HAVE ITEM TEN AND YOU HAVE A
SKETCHED OUT A PRETTY THOROUGH
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN AND I
WANTED TO NOTE THAT AND
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I REALLY
APPRECIATE THAT.
SO WHICH INCLUDES RECYCLING
DONATION AND 90 PERCENT OF THE
DEMOLITION MATERIALS TO BE
REMOVED THAT ARE BEING REMOVED
TO THE SITE AND BEING RECYCLED
AND PREVENTED FROM GOING TO
LANDFILL.
SO THAT'S GREAT.
I THINK THERE'S PROBABLY SOME
VALUABLE MATERIAL IN THAT
BUILDING BECAUSE IT'S OLDER SO
AND SO YOU ARE REALLY DOING THE
RIGHT THING THERE.
I THINK THAT'S TERRIFIC.
SO THERE'S JUST SOMETHING THAT
I DON'T UNDERSTAND ABOUT THE
PART WHERE YOU TALK ABOUT WHY
NOT SOLAR AT THE MOMENT AND SO
IT'S JUST OK SO OVER A 20 YEAR
PERIOD A FIVE KILOWATT SYSTEM
IN ANN ARBOR COULD SAVE ABOUT
25000 DOLLARS IN ELECTRICITY
COSTS WHICH IS OBVIOUSLY NOT A
LOT THAT SAVINGS IS FAR LESS
THAN THE COST TO INSTALL SOLAR
PANELS TO GENERATE ENOUGH POWER
FOR THE ENTIRE BUILDING.
BUT I THINK THAT YOU ALREADY
SAID THAT YOU COULDN'T THERE
WASN'T EVEN ENOUGH ROOM TO
INSTALL SOLAR PANELS TO
GENERATE ENOUGH POWER FOR THE
ENTIRE BUILDING.
>> SO IS THE COST TO INSTALL
WHAT YOU CAN JUST SO EXCESSIVE
OVER A 25000 SAVINGS THAT
YOU'RE NOT EVEN WILLING TO JUST
THROW A FEW PANELS UP THERE TO
SET UP, YOU KNOW, GESTURE?
I MEAN IT WOULD REDUCE
SOMETHING, RIGHT?
>> OH, I GUESS I'D HAVE TO
LEAVE THAT UP TO THE DEVELOPER
OF THAT END.
>> THE COST TO PUT THE PANELS
UP THERE IS A SMALL PERCENTAGE
OF THE ENERGY THAT'S USED IN
THE BUILDING AND IN OVERALL THE
PROJECT MEETS NET ZERO.
IT'S ALL ELECTRIC.
IT'S ALL LED LIGHTING.
THE ONLY THING THAT GAS IS USED
FOR IS HEATING AND IT'S A HIGH
EFFICIENCY HEATING SYSTEM THAT
ALSO USES THE HOT WATER TO ALSO
,YOU KNOW, HEAT WITH
ARCHITECTS OUT IN LINE, I THINK
HE COULD PROBABLY GIVE A MUCH
BETTER EXPLANATION.
I'M A CIVIL ENGINEER, NOT AN
ARCHITECT.
SO IF YOU WANT SOME MORE
DETAILS, MAYBE WE CAN SEE IF
CHRIS IS AVAILABLE TO GIVE YOU
MORE INFORMATION REGARDING THAT
.
YEAH, I MEAN I GUESS MAYBE JUST
A LITTLE BIT MORE CLEAR
INDICATION OF DESPITE THE FACT
THAT YOU CAN'T GENERATE ENOUGH
ELECTRICITY TO OFFSET YOUR USE
WHICH I UNDERSTAND THAT YOU
FEEL THAT IT'S BETTER TO NOT
INSTALL SOLAR FOR WHAT YOU CAN
AND I DO APPRECIATE THAT THAT
YOU HAVE ALL THE HIGH
EFFICIENCY FEATURES OF THIS
BUILDING.
I THINK THAT'S GREAT.
SO BUT IT BUT IT WOULDN'T BE
NET ZERO IF YOU'RE USING GAS
RIGHT, RIGHT.
>> JUST JUST JUST BECAUSE OK,
THANK YOU.
BUT ANYWAY SO YEAH I WOULD LOVE
IT IF YOU'RE IF YOUR ARCHITECT
WANTS TO ANSWER WHY YOU KNOW I
KNOW YOU CAN'T POWER THE WHOLE
THING WITH SOLAR BUT GO AHEAD
MR. BIGGERS.
>> OH I THINK OUR PHONES WE
NEED OUR CALCULATIONS TO ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE ISSUE
WE'RE HAVING THIS WE CAN ONLY
FIND ABOUT THIRTY KILOWATTS
WHERE WE NEED SOMETHING TO KILL
LOTS OF CERTAINLY SOLAR TO THE
BUILDING.
WE JUST CAN'T GET OUT OF THE
BUILDING OUR ONLY SOLAR WHAT'S
OUR GOING ON THE ENERGY
COMPANY?
>> WELL I THINK THAT'S FINE AND
TOTALLY UNDERSTANDABLE BUT THEN
I I I WOULD URGE YOU TO PROVIDE
30 KILOWATTS OF SOLAR.
>> IT'S BETTER THAN NOTHING.
WELL, THE IF YOU KNOW THE SUN
THE GROUP WE HAVE WE SHOW THAT
THE BUILDING WE HAVE SOLAR
PANELS ON THE ROOFS SO WE'RE
JUST CONFIRMING WE CAN PUT THE
SOLAR PANELS UP.
YOU JUST CAN ONLY WE CAN'T JUST
PROVIDE THE WHOLE BUILDING BUT
IT'S CERTAINLY PUT THEM YOU CAN
INSTALL THEM SO THEY WILL BE
INSTALLED OR THE ROOF WILL BE
SOLAR READY IF IT'S DESIGNED TO
HOLD THE SOLAR UNITS WE CAN
CERTAINLY PUT THEM IN ANY TIME.
>> IT WOULD BE GREAT IF THE
TIME WERE NOW I THINK I THINK
WE CAN SPEAK FOR MYSELF.
>> WE CAN THANK YOU FOR
INQUIRING ABOUT THAT AND URGING
IT AND REPORTING BACK OR
HOWEVER THAT WOULD HAPPEN.
>> MR. LEONARD, THANK YOU.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS THAT WANT TO
SPEAK ON THIS PARTICULAR MATTER
?
>> OK, I'M GOING TO ADD A FEW
OF MY COMMENTS IS DAEWON ZONE
FIFTY FIVE HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
OF BLOCK AREA THREE HUNDRED
SEVENTY TWO PERCENT FSR
COMPORTS WITH SIDE SET BACKS
ACTUALLY NONE PRETTY MUCH
THROUGHOUT THAT AS FAR AS THE
ONE ACTUAL STANDARDS GO THIS
THIS COMPLAISANCE OUT THE DC
BLESSING I DO THINK IT'S A
BENEFIT THAT WE GET THE FIRST
FLUSH STORMWATER ON SITE
STORMWATER RETENTION ADDED HERE
THAT THAT'S CERTAINLY A BENEFIT
FROM THE NONEXISTENCE OF IT
NOW.
>> SO BEING BY RIGHT REQUEST
WITH HISTORIC DISTRICT I'M
INCLINED TO SUPPORT.
>> SO ANY OTHER FINAL THOUGHTS
FROM THE PLANNING COMMISSION?
OK WITH THAT WE ARE GOING TO
MOVE ON TO A ROLL CALL VOTES
MR. LEONARD.
>> MR. NORTON
.
YES.
I SURPRISED YOU, MR. ADAMS.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER IT BE YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER GISH.
>> YES.
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS.
YES, MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT.
>> YES.
RIGHT.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
>> YES.
MOTION CARRIES UNANIMOUS.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
AND PLEASE DO CONSIDER
INSTALLING THE SOLAR PANEL.
THANK ONCE THEY CAN.
I GUESS I'LL GET WITH YOU ON
HOW TO RESPOND TO THAT THEN.
>> UM, YOU COULD JUST MAKE SURE
THAT THEY'RE INCLUDED ON YOUR
BUILDING PERMIT PANELS AND WE
CAN VERIFY THAT AND THEN WE CAN
REPORT BACK TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
>> ALL RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
ON TO SECTION NINE B THIS IS
AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE RELATED THE
GENERAL GENERAL ENTERTAINMENT
NEWS SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
THIS IS GOING TO BE SECTIONS
FIVE POINT ONE FIVE AND
SECTIONS FIVE POINT ONE SIX.
WITH THAT WE'RE ACTUALLY TO
MOVE TO STAFF PRESENTATION.
>> MR. LEONARD, TAKE AWAY YEAH
.
>> THANK YOU.
SO AMI ON YOUR AGENDA THIS
EVENING OUR TWO SETS
OF ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS ONE
THIS FIRST ONE IS GENERATED BY
MYSELF.
WE YOU MAY HAVE HEARD RECENTLY
THAT THERE WAS A PROPOSED
PROJECT UNDER CONSIDERATION AND
THAT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
DISPLACE A VERY BELOVED R.K. I
DON'T KNOW IF YOU HEARD
ANYTHING ABOUT THAT BUT IN THE
PAST WE HAVE BEEN VERY, VERY
RESTRICTIVE OF WHERE OUR KIDS
CAN GO.
IN FACT SET OUR KID WAS A NON
CONFORMING USE AT THAT LOCATION
IN OUR DOWNTOWN BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
>> IN FACT IT WAS ONLY ALLOWED
IN THE C ONE A ZONING DISTRICT
C WHEN IS CURRENTLY LIMITED TO
A SMALL AREA AROUND THE
INTERSECTION OF PACKARD AND
STATE AND THE FORMER ANGELO'S
RESTAURANT.
SO THOSE WOULD HAVE BEEN THE
ONLY LOCATIONS IN THE CITY IN
WHICH A COIN OPERATED ARCADE
BUSINESS COULD OPERATE WITHIN
THE DEFINITION OF THE GENERAL
ENTERTAINMENT USE.
THIS SEEMS UNNECESSARILY
RESTRICTIVE TO ME AND SO I
PRESENT TO YOU A PROPOSED
AMENDMENT THAT WOULD HAVE THE
EFFECT OF ALLOWING IN ALL
OF THE OTHER PLACES THAT
GENERAL ENTERTAINMENT USES CAN
BE PERMITTED WHICH IS BASICALLY
ALL OF THE MIXED USE ZONES
ACCEPTING OFFICE AND IN DOING
SO IT LEFT A BIT OF AN ISLAND
IF YOU WILL OF ADDITIONAL USE
STANDARDS THAT IT REFERRED TO
THAT WOULD ALSO LEAVE A WHAT I
THINK IS ALSO UNNECESSARY
RESTRICTION ON THEATERS BEING
LIMITED TO SIX SEATS IN THE C
ONE B OWNING DISTRICTS.
>> AND SO RATHER THAN BEING TO
A SCALPEL LIKE IN ADDRESSING
THE ARCADE I AM BEING MORE
BLUNT IN PROPOSING THE
ELIMINATION OF THAT ENTIRE
SECTION OF ADDITIONAL SPACES
SPECIF OF STANDARDS WHICH WOULD
ALLOW THE THEATERS OF LARGER
THAN 600 SEATS AND C ONE B
DISTRICTS AND WOULD ALLOW
ARCADES IN PLACES LIKE D1, D2
AND ALL OF OUR COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS.
>> I'M HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT YOU MIGHT HAVE.
OK, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ALL RIGHT WITH THAT WE'RE GOING
TO MOVE ON TO PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON THE SITE AND
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR ON THE PHONE
OR USE A RECENT FEATURE ON ZOOM
FOR PHONE ACCESS.
PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AN INTERMEETING ID NINE
SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR
ONE TO DO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME FOR ZOOME
USERS AND YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT
IT'S SHORT TERM TO SPEAK.
PLEASE ENSURE YOU'RE IN A QUIET
AREA MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE
AND FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS AT
THE BEGINNING OF THE COMMENTS
ANYONE PRESENT THAT WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME SEEING
NONE DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
CALLERS?
>> NO HANDS RAISED SHIRLEY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO PLEASE GIVE IT A FEW MORE
SECONDS, OK?
>> WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO
MOVE ON TO THE MOTION I'M GOING
TO CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT.
THE ANN ARBOR CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION HEREBY RECOMMENDS
THAT THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE SECTIONS ONE A FIVE POINT
ONE FIVE ONE AND FIVE POINT ONE
SIX THREE TO REMOVE THE
SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATED TO
GENERAL ENTERTAINMENT USES AS
PROPOSED IN THE ATTACHED
ORDINANCE MOVED BY COUNCILOR
COMMISSIONER WHITE AND SECONDED
BY COMMISSIONER MILLS.
>> WE'RE IN DISCUSSION WHO
LIKES OK COMMISSIONER MILLS.
I DO LIKE ARCADE'S.
THIS REMINDS ME OF THE ZONING
SIMPLIFICATION EFFORT THAT WE
DID IN STARTS AND STOPS ON OAC
A WHILE AGO.
>> IT MAKES ME KIND OF WANT TO
GO BACK TO SEE IF THIS IS ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE'D FLAGGED
LIKE WHERE DID THIS COME FROM?
AT WHAT POINT IN TIME?
I DON'T EXPECT THE HISTORY
OF THAT.
I FEEL LIKE THERE WAS CLEARLY
SOMETHING THAT LED TO THIS
PARTICULAR THANK YOU FOR DOING
MORE THAN JUST THE BARE MINIMUM
NECESSARY AND ALSO HOW MANY
OTHER THINGS LIKE THIS DO WE
HAVE THAT WE COULD WORK TOWARDS
SIMPLIFICATION.
>> SO ONE OR A THOUSAND I KNOW
SO THANK YOU FOR TAKING THEM AS
THEY COME AND NOT ONLY DOING
THE ONE LINE BUT MAKING FOR
THEM.
>> SO THANKS.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER MILLS,
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONER NORTON I'M JUST
CURIOUS DO YOU KNOW WHY THOSE
PROVISIONS WERE WHAT IS THE
HISTORY OF THESE UM I KNOW I
DON'T KNOW BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT
THE CHANGES CATEGORY IT WAS
BASICALLY ONLY A PACARD IN
STATE.
SO THERE MUST HAVE BEEN SOME
SOME HISTORIC PERSPECTIVE THAT
IT WAS ONLY APPROPRIATE WHERE
THERE WAS A HIGH CONCENTRATION
OF OF YOU OF STUDENTS IS MY
BEST US AS FAR AS THE THEATER I
DON'T KNOW BUT WHENEVER I SEE
SOMETHING LIKE THAT IN THE
CODE IT SUGGESTS TO ME THAT
THERE WAS SOME LAND USE OR
PROJECT THAT WAS PROPOSED AND
THERE WAS A PUSHBACK AGAINST
IT.
>> THERE WAS A CONCERN I HATE
LEGISLATION LIKE THAT IF YOU
SEE IT IN THE STATE LEVEL AS
WELL, YOU KNOW, LIKE THIS LAW
APPLIES TO EVERYBODY BUT
COMMUNITIES OF THIRTEEN
THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED AND SIX
TO FOURTEEN THOUSAND SEVEN
HUNDRED AND EIGHT NORTH
OF WHATEVER FELLOW.
SO THAT'S MY BEST GUESS HAD I
DON'T KNOW MORE DETAILS.
>> YEAH.
CAN I BE A GOOD STUDENT PROJECT
SOMETIME?
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE JUST
WAS THERE TROUBLE HERE IN RIVER
CITY THAT MADE IT SO THAT THEY
DIDN'T WANT A POOL HALL OR A
PINBALL ARCADE OR A BIG OLD
MOVIE THEATER?
YOU KNOW IT VERY, VERY WELL
COULD BE YOU KNOW, GENERAL
ENTERTAINMENT, A PRETTY BIG
BROAD CATEGORY.
A LOT OF THINGS FIT INTO THAT.
YOU KNOW IT IT ACTUALLY REMINDS
ME OF A PREVIOUS COMMUNITY I
WORKED IN TATTOO PARLORS, HAD A
LOCATIONAL RESTRICTION FROM ONE
ANOTHER AND I THINK THAT'S
ANOTHER LAND USE EXAMPLE WHERE
HISTORICALLY COMMUNITIES SORT
OF WERE SCARED OF IT AND NOW IT
IS SO COMMONPLACE.
SO IT'S PROBABLY IN THAT SAME
VEIN IF THERE WAS SOME CONCERN
THAT POOL HALLS AND ARCADES
WERE DAMAGING THE MINDS OF THE
YOUTH OF AMERICA AND WE NEEDED
TO MAKE SURE WE ZONE THAT STUFF
AWAY.
>> GOT IT.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER WAITZ.
I JUST WANT TO SAY THANK YOU,
MR LEINERT FOR DOING SOME ONNES
WINNING AND I WELCOME MORE ON
ZONING.
YOU ARE LOOKING FOR AGENDA
ITEMS FOR OUR MARCH 11TH
WORKING SESSION.
YOU COULD PROPOSE ANYWHERE
BETWEEN ONE AND A THOUSAND TONS
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WE COULD
CONSIDER.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS WITH
THOUGHTS
OF OK WITH THAT?
>> JUST A PROCEDURAL
CLARIFICATION THIS
RECOMMENDATION GETS ADVANCE TO
CITY COUNCIL AND SO AS IS THE
UDC REQUIREMENT OR A
MODIFICATION, IT WILL GO TO
CITY COUNCIL AND GO THROUGH TWO
READINGS OTHER THAN THAT, YEAH,
PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD.
>> THE ONLY OTHER CLARIFICATION
I WANT TO MAKE IS EVEN THOUGH
THIS EVEN IF THIS GETS REMOVED
FROM THE ZONING THAT THE
BUILDING DEPARTMENT AND
BUILDING STANDARDS FIRE
AUDITORIUM ETC WILL STILL APPLY
IF SOMEBODY WANTS TO DO A
THOUSAND SEAT AUDITORIUM.
SO ABSOLUTELY ALIVE TODAY AND
WOULD CONTINUE TO PERFECT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO GO ON
TO ROLL CALL MR LEONARD
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
YES, MR ADAMS.
YES.
I'M SURE WETHERBEE YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS YES.
MR DISH YES.
MR EVANS YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WHITE YES.
>> MR LEE.
YES.
MOTION CARRIES UNANIMOUSLY.
>> ALL RIGHT THANK YOU.
OK WE'RE MOVING RIGHT ON U.S.
NINE THIS IS AMENDMENTS TO THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE RELATED TO THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD, A DESIGN REVIEW
AND DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
>> THIS IS IN SECTIONS FIVE
POINT ONE SEVEN AND FIVE POINT
TWO SEVEN AND FIVE POINT TO
EIGHT.
THE FIRST OFF WILL MOVE ON TO
STAFF PRESENTATION.
MR LEONARD.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER LEE.
SO THIS ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
ORIGINATED FROM A DIFFERENT
SOURCE AND TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
THE CITY COUNCIL RECEIVED A
REPORT AUTHORED BY THE CITY
ADMINISTRATION ENTITLED A NEW
APPROACH TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.
>> AND I THINK THIS IS THIS
REPORT HAS BEEN SHARED WITH YOU
PREVIOUSLY.
IT'S THAT'S OF COURSE PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE AND IT WAS JUST THAT
A SERIES OF RECOMMENDATIONS ON
HOW THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR MIGHT
START THINKING ABOUT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PERHAPS DIFFERENTLY
THAN IT HAD IN THE PAST.
>> THE REPORT WAS FOUNDED IN A
LOT OF LOOKING BACK AT HISTORY
OF OF REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS,
HOW THE CITY HAD HAD ROLES OR
NOT HAD ROLES IN SOME OF THEM.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, YOU MIGHT
RECALL THE
PUBLIC PUBLISHING
COMPANY ON S ON S STATE THAT
THE CITY COUNCIL HISTORICALLY
HAD HAD SORT OF WRESTLED WITH
WHETHER OR NOT TO TAKE A MORE
ACTIVE ROLE IN AND PURCHASING
OR ARE DICTATING WHAT COULD
HAPPEN AT THAT SITE.
>> THE REPORT WAS ALSO
GENERATED WITH INPUT WITH A
SERIES OF INTERVIEWS THAT WERE
NOT CONDUCTED BY PLANNING STAFF
BUT RATHER OTHER CITY OTHER
CITY STAFF MEMBERS FROM OTHER
DEPARTMENTS WITH ARCHITECTS,
DEVELOPERS, ENGINEERS TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND AND SOME OF THE WAYS
THAT OUR PROCESS FOR JUST
ACCOMPLISHING DEVELOPMENT WAS
WORKING WELL AND OPPORTUNITIES
TO MAYBE IMPROVE IT.
>> OUT OF THIS REPORT CAME A
SERIES FOR RESOLUTIONS AND ONE
OF THESE RESOLUTIONS WAS TO
IMPLEMENT NEW PROCESSES AND
PROGRAMS FOR HOUSING AND
DEVELOPMENT AT ALL INCOME
LEVELS TO SUPPORT HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY AND VERY
EXPLICITLY IN THAT RESOLUTION
WHICH WAS ADOPTED IN APRIL
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THE A
SERIES OF RECOMMENDATIONS WAS
MADE TO BASICALLY WORK ON
STREAMLINING, IMPROVING,
ADJUSTING OUR PROCESSES TO
PERHAPS MAKE THEM MORE COST
EFFECTIVE, MORE QUICK SO THAT
WHEN THE CITY IS LAYING OUT
EXPECTATIONS AND DESIRES FOR
DEVELOPMENT WE HAVE A FASTER
PATHWAY FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR
TO MEET THOSE TIME AND
UNCERTAIN ARE CHALLENGES TO
DEVELOPING A FALSE PERIOD.
>> AND SO WHENEVER WE AS A
COMMUNITY CAN BE CLEAR AND
FORTHRIGHT AND QUICK WITH OUR
REVIEW AND DECISION MAKING ON
PROJECTS THAT IS GOING TO MAKE
IT MORE EASY AND POTENTIALLY
MORE AFFORDABLE.
>> ONE OF THE SPECIFIC
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THIS
RESOLUTION WAS A SERIES
OF PROCESS CHANGES INTENDED TO
ADJUST THE SOME OF THE UPFRONT
REQUIREMENTS OF THE DEVELOPMENT
REVIEW PROCESS.
>> ONE OF THESE IS TO AMEND THE
ORDINANCE SO THAT HEARINGS
BEFORE THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
ARE NO LONGER REQUIRED AND THAT
BECOMES A FUNCTION OF PLANNING
STAFF'S REVIEW OF THAT
ORDINANCE.
>> AND SO IN SHORT THAT IS THE
ORIGIN OF THIS PROPOSED
ORDINANCE AMENDMENT THAT'S
BEING PRESENTED TO YOU TONIGHT
.
>> THE PROPOSED CHANGES WOULD
ELIMINATE THIS APPOINTED BOARD,
THAT DESIGN REVIEW BOARD WHICH
IS CURRENTLY CREATED IN THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE AND
YOU WILL RECALL WE PRESENTED A
VERSION OF THIS TO A WORKING
SESSION PREVIOUSLY AND ONE
OF THE QUESTIONS THAT WAS POSED
TO THIS BOARD WAS SHOULD WE IN
FACT NOT ONLY FOLLOW THAT
DIRECTION BUT ELIMINATE THE
DESIGN GUIDELINES ALTOGETHER
AND YOUR FEEDBACK WAS A
RESOUNDING NO.
THOSE THOSE DESIGN GUIDELINES
DO HAVE A VALUE TO CONSIDER
AGAINST PROJECTS.
SO WHAT THIS ORDINANCE HERE
INTENDS TO DO IS TO BE MORE
FATEFUL RESPONSE TO THAT
DIRECTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION.
IT MAINTAINS THE DESIGN
GUIDELINES BUT AS NOTED IT
WOULD INCORPORATE THOSE INTO
BASICALLY THE INFORMATION THAT
WE ARE PROVIDING TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION OR TO THE
CITY COUNCIL WHOEVER THE BODY
IS THAT'S APPROVING THE SIPKIN
THE THIS WILL RENDER SAVING
TIME SAVINGS PROJECTS BECAUSE
RIGHT NOW THAT IS A REQUIREMENT
THAT HAS TO HAPPEN.
BASICALLY IT ADDS A MONTH TO
THE PROCESS BEFORE A PROJECT
CAN COME TO THE CITY.
YOU HAVE TO GO THROUGH THAT
REQUIREMENT BEFORE YOU CAN
SUBMIT PROJECT TO THE CITY AND
BY ELIMINATING THAT REQUIREMENT
AND MAKING IT CONCURRENT WITH
OUR TECHNICAL REVIEW OF THE
SITE PLAN, WE ELIMINATE A MONTH
OFF OF THE REVIEW PROCESS FOR
PROJECTS THAT ARE REQUIRED
REQUIRED TO GO THROUGH THAT
WHICH ARE BASICALLY IN THE
DOWNTOWN AND NOT IN THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT.
JUST AS A REMINDER AS CURRENTLY
AS CURRENTLY CONFIGURED THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND THE
DESIGN GUIDELINES WERE
INTENTIONALLY SET UP TO BE
NON-BINDING AND THEY REMAIN
THAT WAY.
>> THESE WERE PUT IN PLACE
SHORTLY AFTER SWEEPING CHANGES
TO OUR DOWNTOWN ZONING
DISTRICT.
THE CREATION OF THE D1 AND D2
ZONES AND THEY WERE VERY
PURPOSEFULLY THERE WAS A DEBATE
BUT THEY WERE VERY PURPOSELY
MADE TO BE ADVISORY I THINK FOR
GOOD REASON WHEN YOU WANT TO
MAKE SOMETHING BINDING YOU HAVE
TO MEASURE IT.
YOU HAVE TO BE PRESCRIPTIVE AND
THAT'S GOING TO ADD A SENSE
OF RIGIDITY TO DESIGN THAT I
THINK IS FRANKLY I DON'T KNOW
THAT THAT WOULD ACHIEVE THE
RESULTS THAT PEOPLE ARE LOOKING
FOR EITHER YOU WILL HAVE SEEN A
LOT OF COMMUNICATION ON THIS,
SOME FROM THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD AS WELL MEMBERS AS WELL.
>> AND YOU KNOW, I THINK I
DON'T I DON'T WANT TO SPEAK FOR
THEM BUT I THINK SOME OF THE
FEEDBACK THAT THEY WOULD THAT I
SUMMARIZED FROM THAT IS TAKING
ISSUE WITH SOME OF THE
CONCLUSIONS THAT WERE IN THAT
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REPORT
THAT A STAFF REVIEW OF APPLYING
THOSE STANDARDS TO A PROJECT
HAS A SIMILAR OUTCOME AND
BENEFIT AS A BOARD OF VARYING
PROFESSIONAL PERSPECTIVES.
HAVING THAT SAME CONVERSATION
AT THE SAME TOKEN I WOULD SAY
THAT ONE OF THE THINGS I THERE
HAVE BEEN PROJECTS THAT, YOU
KNOW, HAVE CHANGED FROM THAT
ADVISORY CONVERSATION OF THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
THERE HAVE BEEN PROJECTS THAT
IN MY ESTIMATION WERE IMPROVED
FROM THAT PROCESS.
THERE ARE PROJECTS FROM IN MY
ESTIMATION I DON'T THINK WE'RE
THAT IMPROVED IN THAT PROCESS.
>> I THINK IT'S FRANKLY
SOMEWHAT OF A SUBJECTIVE
OUTCOME AND MORE GENERALLY AND
IT SOUNDS FLIPPANT BUT I I I DO
I DON'T HEAR FROM THE COMMUNITY
CELEBRATION OF THE ARCHITECTURE
THAT'S COMING OUT OF THIS
PROCESS IN OUR IN OUR CITY.
THAT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT I'M
TYPICALLY HEARING THAT PEOPLE
LOVE THE ARCHITECTURE THAT'S
THAT'S BEING BUILT IN THIS TOWN
SO THE OPPORTUNITY TO
STREAMLINE THAT PROCESS TO
MAYBE MEET SOME OF OUR OTHER
GOALS SUCH AS AFFORDABILITY,
SUSTAINABILITY AS WE HAVE FOUND
WAYS TO MEMORIALIZE THOSE
EXPECTATIONS AND TO CODE THAT'S
THE PREMISE OF THESE PROPOSED
CHANGES.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR THERE'S
ANOTHER CHANGE, A SERIES
OF CHANGES THAT'S PRESENTED
HERE THAT ARE TOTALLY STAFF
DRIVEN AND THAT IS CHANGES TO
THE PROPOSED MATERIALS
REQUIREMENTS THAT APPLY IN THE
DOWNTOWN.
THOSE ARE NOT SPECIFICALLY
ADDRESSED IN THE REPORT OR THE
RESOLUTION.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S COME UP
RECENTLY IN A COUPLE OF CASES
WHERE IN PROJECTS THAT ARE
SEEKING TO IMPROVE THEIR
EFFICIENCY THEY HAVE SOUGHT TO
USE A BUILDING TECHNOLOGY
EXTERIOR AND INSULATION
FINISHING SYSTEMS EFFORTS AND
EFFORTS FRANKLY HAS SORT OF BAD
REPUTATION AND THE PLANNING
ESTHETIC WORLD I'M SURE IT CAN
BE USED WELL BUT IT CAN ALSO BE
USED IN SOME OF THE BLANDEST
STRIP MALLS AND CHAIN
PHARMACIES THAT YOU PROBABLY
CAN IMAGINE ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AND BUT IT DOES ADD UP BUILDING
MATERIAL THAT PROVIDES AN
ENERGY EFFICIENCY TOOL THAT IF
WE DON'T ALLOW IT WE'RE NOT
PROVIDING THAT AS AN
OPPORTUNITY.
>> SO STAFF IS ADDED I
SPECIFICALLY ADDED LANGUAGE
INTO THIS DRAFT THAT WOULD
ALLOW THAT AND I JUST WANT TO
BE REALLY CLEAR.
I THINK IT IS A TAKING A BIT
OF AN ESTHETIC RISK WITH OUR
COMMUNITY TO PROVIDE MORE
ENERGY EFFICIENCY POTENTIAL.
>> I THINK THAT WHEN YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT THAT PARTICULAR
ASPECT OF MATERIALS I POSIT TO
YOU AS WELL THAT IF WE ARE
GOING TO BE VERY BROAD AND
ALLOWING ALL THESE MATERIALS IT
BEING ALL THE MATERIALS THAT
ARE ALREADY THERE, ANOTHER
AVENUE IS TO JUST ELIMINATE
MATERIAL RESTRICTIONS AND
REQUIREMENTS ALTOGETHER IS IF I
THINK THAT THERE IS PROBABLY
SOME HISTORY AND BASIS FOR
TRYING TO RESTRICT EFFORTS BY
ADOPTING THOSE IN THE FIRST
PLACE AND IF WE WANT TO OPEN IT
UP TO THAT MATERIAL, ANOTHER
METHOD MIGHT YOU JUST TO TO THE
ONGOING CONVERSATION JUST
ELIMINATE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
ALTOGETHER.
>> I I'LL STOP THERE.
>> ANY QUESTIONS YOU HAVE AN
HOUR AFTER THE OF COURSE
DELIBERATION.
>> OK, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> WE'RE MOVING ON TO PUBLIC
COMMENT FIRST SO YEAH WE'LL GET
TO DISCUSSION JUST A SEC OK
WITH THAT.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
MR LUNNER.
WE ARE MOVING ON TO A PUBLIC
HEARING.
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
THREE MINUTES ON THIS ITEM
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON THE
PHONE OR USE A REAL HAND
FEATURE ON ZOOME THE PHONE
ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND UNDER MEETING
EIGHTY NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO SIX CITY
STAFF WILL CALL ON OH WELL
IDENTIFY CALLERS FOR THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME ON ZOOME
YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE ENSURE
THAT YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS?
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS THE BEGINNING OF THE
COMMENTS.
>> IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME
WE CAN.
>> GERBRANDT DIDN'T IDENTIFY
MYSELF LAST TIME.
TWENTY EIGHT HAVE REMAINED
CAUGHT.
YEAH I DON'T KNOW ANYTHING
ABOUT BUILDING ESTHETICS BUT I
AM ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE AS MR
LEONARD
MENTIONED WHO IS NOT
CELEBRATING THE OVERALL
ESTHETIC QUALITY OF OUR RECENT
BUILDINGS DOWNTOWN.
BUT I DON'T THINK IT'S FAIR TO
PUT THAT ON THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD.
I THINK THAT AS MR LEONARD
POINTED OUT, THESE ARE
COMPLETELY NON BINDING KINDS
OF DISCUSSIONS.
IT'S MEANT TO BE COLLEGIAL AND
FRIENDLY, REACH A RAPPORT
BETWEEN THE PETITIONER AND THE
EXPERT DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND
ALSO I WOULD LIKE A LITTLE BIT
PERHAPS MORE EXPLANATION ABOUT
WHY THIS DELAYS THE PROCESS A
MONTH THIS HAPPENS VERY EARLY
IN THE REVIEW PROCESS.
I MEAN I WOULD ASSUME THAT THE
OTHER SUBMISSIONS AND REVIEWS
CAN BE GOING CONCURRENTLY WITH
THIS AND THAT YOU KNOW, MAYBE
THERE IS A WEEK OR TWO I DON'T
KNOW.
BUT I THINK THAT THERE'S A BIT
MORE EXPLANATION NOT SAYING
IT'S WRONG.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO HEAR MORE
SO I SPOKE TO ONE OF THE I
CONTACTED ONE OF THE DESIGN
REWARD REVIEW BOARD PEOPLE AND
THEY TOLD ME NOT TO BOTHER
SHOWING UP TONIGHT NOT BECAUSE
THEY DON'T LIKE YOU GUYS BUT
THEY DON'T FEEL THEY HAVE THE
VOTES AND CITY COUNCIL TO SAVE
THE BOARD.
BUT I'M GOING TO QUOTE FROM THE
LETTER ANYWAY.
CITY COUNCIL MOST OF US HERE ON
THE DERBY HAVE SPENT MY
PROFESSIONAL CAREER SITTING ON
THE PETITIONERS SIDE OF THE
TABLE.
WE UNDERSTAND THAT THE PROCESS
IS ONEROUS FROM START TO FINISH
AND IF IT COULD BE STREAMLINED
BY ELIMINATING A STEP, SUCH A
CHANGE SHOULD BE CONSIDERED.
THE QUESTIONS BECOME WHAT WILL
WE GIVE UP BY DOING THAT AND
WHAT WOULD BE GAINED AND THEY
GO ON PETITIONERS TO BRING
DESIGN THOUGHTS THAT WERE STILL
IN THE EARLY FORMATIVE STAGE
BEFORE EXTENSIVE ARCHITECTURAL
AND ENGINEERING FEES HAD BEEN
SPENT SINCE THAT TENDS TO MAKE
PETITIONERS DIG IN THEIR HEELS.
THE INTENT WAS TO MAKE THE
ACTUAL REVIEW LEGAL EXPERIENCE.
SO WHAT WOULD BE GIVING UP
THEIR RIGHT THAT SOME
PETITIONERS DO IGNORE THE
BOARD.
HOWEVER OTHER PETITIONERS HAVE
EMBRACED THE PROCESS.
THEY TYPICALLY ASK FOR A SECOND
VISIT TO DISCUSS THE PROCESS
MORE FULLY AND DOBIAS HAS HAD A
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON THE
QUALITY OF THOSE DESIGNS AND SO
FORTH AND THE OFFER TWO
EXAMPLES OF OUR CITY AND
KOREATOWN PLACE IN THE INCLUDE
SOME RENDERINGS BEFORE AND
AFTER OTHER BENEFITS, THE
PUBLIC DISCUSSION DESIGN THAT
AH AND THAT INCREASES THE
DEMAND FOR GOOD DESIGN AS THE
PUBLIC BECOMES MORE AWARE, THE
PLANNING STAFF LEARN HOW A
GROUP OF DIVERSE PROFESSIONALS
APPROACH DESIGN AND HOW IT CAN
BE BALANCED WITH THE
FEASIBILITY A PROJECT THIS IS
WHAT WE WOULD BE WE WOULD BE
GIVING UP AND WHAT WOULD BE
GAINED.
AS WE UNDERSTAND IT'S ONLY A
FEW WEEKS THAT A SMALL NUMBER
OF PROJECTS ONLY IN THE
DISTRICT ARE CURRENTLY REQUIRED
TO INCLUDE IN THE APPROVAL
PROCESS.
IS THIS WORTH WHAT WE'RE GIVING
UP SIGNATORIES GEOPARK, LAURIE
SHINGLETOWN, TAMARA BURNS, BILL
KENLY, JOHN KOTOWSKI, RICHARD
MITCHELL, WENDY RAMPTON FORMER
IN OUR PLANNING DEPARTMENT
MANAGER.
>> THANK YOU MR GARBA.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
PRESIDENT THAT WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME SEEING NONE
?
DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE CALLERS?
NO HANDS RAISED SHIRLEY THANK
YOU.
GIVE IT A SECOND OK WITH THAT
WE WILL CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
I'M GOING TO READ THE PROPOSED
MOTION AGAIN FOR CLARIFICATION
.
>> THIS IS A UNIQUE
MODIFICATION.
THIS IS SIMPLY A RECOMMENDATION
TO CITY COUNCIL.
>> THE ANN ARBOR CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION HEREBY RECOMMENDS
THAT THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE SECTIONS FIVE POINT ONE
SEVEN POINT SIX AND FIVE POINT
TO SEVEN POINT FIVE AND FIVE
POINT TWO EIGHT POINT FIVE TO
ELIMINATE THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD, MODIFY THE DESIGN REVIEW
PROCESS TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE
FUNCTION, REVISE A DOWNTOWN
BUILDING MATERIAL REGULATION AS
PROPOSED IN THE ATTACHED
ORDINANCE MOVED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER THIS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE WE
ARE MOVING ON TO DISCUSSION
ANYBODY WANT TO TAKE THIS OFF
COMMISSIONER MILLS' TONIGHT IS
THE NIGHT THAT I WILL RAISE MY
HAND FIRST.
>> OK OF A COUPLE OF THOUGHTS
ON THIS SO THERE WERE A LOT
OF COMMUNICATIONS OR A NUMBER
OF COMMUNICATIONS IN THE PACKET
AND ONE OF POINTED US TO THE
LESS DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
MEETING AND SO I WATCHED PARTS
OF IT WHAT ACTUALLY I DIDN'T
THINK ABOUT THAT UNTIL SITTING
HERE TONIGHT.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THE
PROPOSAL IS TO DO AWAY WITH THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD FOR ALL
TYPES OF BUILDINGS ON THAT
PARTICULAR MEETING THEY WERE
TALKING ABOUT A HOTEL LIKE THE
DIRECTIVE IS REALLY AIMED AT
HOUSING AND THERE'S A NUMBER
OF THAT OF OTHER BUILDINGS THAT
COME BEFORE US AND SO I THINK
IT IS WISE I THINK AGAIN
UNDERSTANDING LIKE HOW WE CAN
REDUCE BARRIERS FOR THE THINGS
THAT WE WANT TO SEE ARE REALLY
IMPORTANT.
>> AND I'M CURIOUS IF HOW WE
OUGHT TO THINK ABOUT THIS IN
LIGHT OF LIKE DOING AWAY WITH
THE BOARD THAT GOES BEYOND
HOUSING.
>> SO THAT'S ONE THING THAT
STRUCK ME.
THE OTHER THING THAT I JUST TRY
TO DEAL WITH FROM MY DAY JOB IS
THE IDEA THAT IT'S EASIER TO
INCORPORATE FEEDBACK WHEN YOU
HEAR IT EARLY BUT ONCE THE
PROJECT IS FULLY COOKED IT IS
REALLY TOO LATE AND THAT'S WHEN
IT'S REALLY HARD FOR A
DEVELOPER IT'S UNFAIR FOR A
DEVELOPER TO BRING THINGS UP AT
THE LAST MINUTE WHEN THEY'VE
ALREADY FULLY COOKED THE PATCH
PROJECT.
>> AND SO I AGAIN WOULD I THERE
WERE A NUMBER OF COMMENTS ABOUT
KIND OF REIMAGINING THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD PART OF THAT COULD
BE NOT HAVING A PUBLIC MEETING
OR NOT HAVING A SPECIAL MEETING
BUT BEING PART OF THE COMMUNITY
MEETING THAT'S HELD EARLY AGAIN
TO GET COMMUNITY FEEDBACK AND
IF THOSE MEMBERS ATTENDED THAT,
I THINK THAT THAT'S AN
INTERESTING CONCEPT I THOUGHT
OF BEFORE THE IDEA THAT THERE'S
OTHER VALUES THAT WE HAVE NOT
JUST DESIGN BUT SUSTAINABILITY
AND IMAGINE IF THERE WAS THAT
WAS AN ELEMENT OF IT.
AGAIN, THIS IS BEYOND THE
SCOPE.
>> SO BUT I THINK I THINK THAT
THAT IS THERE ARE IDEAS WORTH
CONSIDERING AND KIND
OF UNDERSTANDING LIKE A BIT
OF A ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS AND
PARTICULARLY THAT THIS IDEA
THAT THIS WAS COMING FROM A
DIRECTIVE ABOUT MAKING HOUSING
ACROSS ALL INCOME LEVELS MORE
POSSIBLE BUT THAT IT APPLIES TO
NOT JUST HOUSING IS SOMETHING
THAT IS STRIKING.
SO ON THE FIRST PART OF IT, THE
SECOND PART OF ABOUT IF IT'S IF
IT'S IF IT'S IF IT'S THANK YOU
.
>> UM I HAVE NO FEELING ONE WAY
OR THE OTHER ABOUT THIS BUT ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT STRIKES ME
IN THE MATERIALS IS THE OTHER
LIST OF BANNED MATERIALS
INCLUDING VINYL SIDING AND
THERE WAS AN ACTIVE DEBATE WITH
OUR ARCHITECTS THAT ARE
SUSTAINABILITY MINDED ABOUT THE
LIFECYCLE LIKE THIS DENHA LIKE
VINYL SIDING HOW SUSTAINABLE IT
IS IS HOTLY CONTESTED BECAUSE
IT IS VERY DURABLE AND SO OVER
THE COURSE OF ITS LIFECYCLE
THAT'S ONE OF THE BAND
MATERIALS RIGHT NOW AND SO THAT
MAY BE THE ARGUMENT FOR
STRIKING THE MATERIALS ENTIRELY
.
>> SO THAT IS NOT WHAT IS IN
THIS PROPOSAL.
BUT I DON'T KNOW IF THERE ARE
OTHER THINGS THAT ARE LIKE THAT
AND FINALLY ONE OF THE THINGS
FROM I DON'T KNOW IF IT WAS IN
THE WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS OR
AGAIN IN THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD MEETING THE IDEA THAT AH
,WE HAVE NOT MADE TONS
OF CHANGES TO THE STANDARDS OR
TO THE DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES
THEY'RE NOT STANDARDS BECAUSE
THEY ARE VOLUNTARY ONLY BUT THE
GUIDELINES AND IT FEELS LIKE
THERE IS SOME EXPERTIZE ABOUT
LIKE CHANGES THAT COULD BE MADE
AND SO THAT WOULD BE A SHAME TO
LOSE ABOUT LIKE WHAT IN THE
GUIDELINES WERE NOT WORKING
THAT COULD BE PULLED ON.
SO THOSE ARE I THINK THAT THAT
PARTICULARLY IF THE DESIGN
GUIDELINES ARE TO LIVE ON AND
WE TALKED ABOUT THE BENEFIT
OF HAVING THEM LIVE ON MAYBE
NOT IN THEIR CURRENT FORMAT BUT
THERE IS SOMETHING ELSE BUT IT
WOULD BE USEFUL TO GET THAT
EXPERTIZE.
>> THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
MILLS WILL GO TO COMMISSIONER
APRON'S WIJDAN I CAN BE FAST.
I JUST WILL UNDERSCORE
EVERYTHING COMMISSIONER BILL
SAID I AGREE WITH ALL OF THAT
AND MAYBE I WOULD SAY THAT FOR
ME THE COMBINATION OF THESE TWO
THINGS IN ONE MOTION FEELS
DIFFICULT.
SO I THINK THINKING ABOUT THE
THE ROLE AND THE EXISTENCE
OF THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD IS
ONE THING AND THEN THINKING
ABOUT THE DESIGN THE DOWNTOWN
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND RE
REVAMPING THOSE OR MODIFYING
THOSE FEELS LIKE A DIFFERENT
THING.
I WOULD I DON'T KNOW IF I NEED
TO MAKE AN OFFICIAL MOTION BUT
MAYBE I JUST WANT TO FLOAT THE
IDEA THAT WE MAYBE TAKE THESE
TWO THINGS UP SEPARATELY BUT I
WOULDN'T BE PREPARED TO VOTE
FOR EITHER OF EITHER OF THEM AT
THIS MOMENT FOR FOR DIFFERENT
REASONS, MANY OF WHICH
COMMISSIONER MILLS ARTICULATED
AND I GUESS I'M JUST CURIOUS TO
HEAR MAYBE MORE FROM YOU, MR
LENAR.
LIKE IN WHAT WAY STAFF WORKED
WITH THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD TO
THINK CREATIVELY ABOUT HOW TO
ADDRESS THE CITY COUNCIL WAS
REQUESTING OR IF IT FEELS A
LITTLE BIT LIKE AN AX INSTEAD
OF A SCALPEL SITUATION TO ME.
>> SO I'D LIKE TO IF THERE WAS
OTHER IF THERE WERE OTHER
CONVERSATIONS THAT HAPPENED OR
OTHER MEETINGS OR CONSULTATIONS
,I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR ABOUT
THOSE THINGS.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
APRON'S COMMISSIONER WHICH I
JUST WANT IT TO COME BACK TO MR
GRUBBERS QUESTION REALLY
QUICKLY.
>> YES.
YEAH.
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT SO YOU
ASKED ABOUT WHY IT
WOULD TAKE A
MONTH SO I'M READING FROM THE
NEW
APPROACH TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S THE DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENT
THAT JOHN FORMER FORNIER, OUR
FORMER DEPUTY CITY
ADMINISTRATOR, AUTHOR ORTHOTIC
ON PAGE FORTY SEVEN AND FORTY
EIGHT HE ADDRESSES THAT AND I
THINK IT HAS TO DO WITH THE
OPEN MEETINGS ACT SO THEIR
MEETINGS ARE CONDUCTED AND
COMPLIANCE WITH THAT WHICH
REQUIRES A TEN DAY NOTIFICATION
PLUS IT REQUIRES STAFF TIME AND
MINUTES AND OTHER POSTINGS.
SO I THINK THAT ADDS TO THE
TIMING BECAUSE OF THE NOTICING
AND UP ABOVE I THINK THIS IS AN
ISSUE THAT YOU HAVE RAISED AT
OUR TABLE.
MR POINTIER ALSO TALKS ABOUT
THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
NOTIFICATION BEING IN CONCERT
WITH THAT AND THAT'S WHERE HE
IS ESTIMATING THAT THE PROCESS
CAN SHAVE TWO TO FOUR WEEKS OFF
OF THE PROCESS BECAUSE OF ALL
OF THE NOTICING AND THE BACK
AND FORTH WITH THAT.
SO I DON'T HAVE ANY COMMENTS
ABOUT THIS.
THIS COMES FROM CITY COUNCIL.
THEY WANT TO GET RID OF THIS
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND I WON'T
STAND IN THEIR WAY.
>> THANK YOU.
WE'RE GOING TO COUNCIL MEMBER
DESH THEN COMMISSIONER WHETHER
IT BE UM I WANTED TO ASK A
COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
>> UM SO ABOUT HOW MANY
PROJECTS COME BEFORE THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD IN A YEAR?
UM EVERISS LAST YEAR I'M SORRY
I SHOULD HAVE HAD THIS DATA BUT
NO I WOULD ESTIMATE LAST YEAR
MIGHT HAVE BEEN FIVE TO SIX AND
AND I THINK WE'VE PROBABLY HAD
YEARS WHERE WE HAD TO SO I
WOULD SAY ON AVERAGE PROBABLY
FOUR TO SIX PER YEAR.
>> OK, UM AND THANK YOU
COMMISSIONER WHITECHURCH FOR
THAT REMINDER OF WHAT'S IN JOHN
FOURNIER'S MEMO.
SO
I I FEEL AS THOUGH WE COULD
MAKE A GOOD ARGUMENT FOR NOT
DOING EVERY SINGLE THING THAT
IS IN JOHN FOURNIER'S MEMO.
>> YEAH, WE COULD AND THEN WE
WILL END UP EXACTLY WHERE WE
STARTED WHICH IS THAT WE ARE A
CITY WHERE IT IS VERY EXPENSIVE
TO DEVELOP BECAUSE WE HAVE A
LOT OF REGULATIONS AND A LOT
OF REQUIREMENTS.
MANY OF THEM THAT DON'T EVEN
PRODUCE THE OUTCOMES THAT WE
WANT.
>> I THINK THAT WE ARE A CITY
THAT IS FRENETICALLY SPLIT IN
ITS ATTENTION TO VARIOUS GOALS.
MANY OF WHICH ARE
CONTRAINDICATED, WHICH IS
PARTLY SOMETHING THAT WE ARE
TRYING TO SOLVE IN THE REVIS
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND PLAN
BECAUSE WE HAVE PIECES OF THE
PLAN THAT ARE AT ODDS WITH EACH
OTHER.
EVEN OUR SUSTAINABILITY AND
AFFORDABILITY GOALS CAN
CONFLICT WITH EACH OTHER
BECAUSE OF THE LIMITS ON WHAT
WHAT BUILDINGS CAN DO AND I
REALLY SEE THIS AS A MINOR
CHANGE.
I WOULD BE I BELIEVE
SUPPORTIVE.
I WOULD KNOW I KNOW THAT I
WOULD BE SUPPORTIVE OF THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD HELPING TO
UPDATE THE CURRENT GUIDELINES.
I IMAGINE THAT'S AN EVOLVING
PROCESS.
>> SO IT'S NOT AS THOUGH WE
WILL UPDATE THEM NOW IN 2025
AND THEN THEY WILL NEVER NEED
TO BE UPDATED AGAIN BUT STILL
WE HAVE THE BOARD THEY AS A
RECOGNITION OF THEIR EXPERTIZE
WHICH I IMAGINE IS CONSIDERABLE
FROM A LIST OF PEOPLE THAT'S ON
THERE.
>> IT'D BE GREAT IF THEY WANTED
TO TAKE A CRACK AT SIMPLIFYING
AND UPDATING THOSE GUIDELINES
AND THINKING ABOUT THE THINGS
THAT WE ARE TRYING TO
ACCOMPLISH AS A CITY.
>> BUT I THINK WE NEED TO FOCUS
AND I THINK WE NEED TO FOCUS ON
TAKING DELAYS OUT OF THE
PROCESS AND FOCUSING OUR
EXTREMELY LEAN STAFF ON THE
THINGS THAT IT IS MOST
IMPORTANT FOR US TO GET DONE.
AND THIS TO ME FEELS LIKE THE
STUFFED ANIMAL THAT'S TAKING UP
SOME ROOM IN MY SHOE CABINET
AND IT'S OK TO LET GO.
>> IT'S A SMALL THING AND I
DON'T MEAN TO SAY THAT IT'S A
TRIVIAL THING BUT I'M SAYING
THAT THE WORK WE'RE TRYING TO
DO IS HARD AND WE HAVE TO LOOK
FOR SAVINGS AND WE CAN'T KEEP
ASKING TO DO MORE ON TOP
OF EVERYTHING ELSE.
SO I AM STRONGLY IN FAVOR AND I
DON'T SPEAK FOR ALL OF COUNCIL
BUT THIS IS A POSITION THAT I
WILL DEFEND AT COUNCIL.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER DESH.
YEAH YEAH SURE THING.
>> SORRY.
AND THEN YEAH.
>> SO JUST A COUPLE OF THINGS
THAT I WANT RESPOND TO.
I DO HAVE THE NUMBERS AND I'M
SORRY I WAS WAY OUT OVER THE
LAST FOUR YEARS WE'VE HAD TWO
DERBY APPLICATIONS PER YEAR ON
AVERAGE OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS
WE'RE AT ABOUT FOUR PER YEAR SO
SO THAT'S SORT OF THE VOLUME I
WANT TO THE THERE WAS MUCH
RAYBURN'S YOU TALKED ABOUT THE
KIND OF CONFLATION OF DESIGN
GUIDELINES MATERIAL AND THE
DERBY I WANT TO BE CLEAR THE
MATERIALS THAT IS IN FRONT
OF YOU IS NOT DESIGN
GUIDELINES.
THAT IS THOSE ARE STANDARDS
THAT WERE PUT INTO THE UDC SO
THAT THAT IS THAT IS ABOVE AND
BEYOND ANYTHING THAT WE HAVE IN
OUR DESIGN GUIDELINES DOCUMENT.
SO I JUST WE CAN DEFINITELY
BIFURCATE THOSE REGARDLESS BUT
I WANTED TO BE CLEAR THAT THOSE
DON'T ORIGINATE FROM THE DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND THEN THE
CONVERSATION JUST A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT TIMING.
>> THAT RESOLUTION ALSO TALKS
ABOUT THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
ORDINANCE AND IMPROVEMENTS TO
THAT PROCESS.
BUT THERE'S SOME STACKING THAT
HAPPENS.
>> SO FOR PROJECTS THAT HAVE TO
GO TO THE DRP AS INDICATED THEY
IT'S ABOUT A MONTH BECAUSE WE
HAVE AN APPLICATION DEADLINE
STAFF PUTS TOGETHER THE STAFF
REPORT.
WE GO OUT, WE TAKE PHOTOGRAPHS
OF THE PROJECT WE HAVE TO
COMPLY WITH THE OPEN MEETINGS
ACT.
WE NOTICE THAT WE SEND OUT A
MAILING TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND
TENANTS WITHIN 500 FEET OF THAT
PROJECT.
SO WE WITHIN A MONTH WE NEED
SOME SPACE IN ORDER TO
ACCOMPLISH THOSE GOALS.
THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
MEETING ALSO IS INTENDED TO
HAPPEN AFTER THE DESIGN REVIEW
PROCESS.
SO WHERE YOU HAVE PROJECTS THAT
ARE DOING BOTH OF THOSE YOU
HAVE THAT MONTH WINDOW OF THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND THEN
THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
PROCESS AND THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS HAS ITS
OWN TIME IMPLICATIONS.
YOU HAVE TO SEND OUT NOTICES TO
PROPERTY OWNERS THAT HAS TO
OCCUR AT LEAST TEN DAYS PRIOR
TO THE APPLICATION DEADLINE FOR
YOU SUBMITTING YOUR SITE PLAN.
>> SO AGAIN AND AGAIN I JUST TO
TELEGRAPH HOW SORT HOW I'LL BE
THINKING OF THAT IS THAT I
THINK THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
PROCESS IS VERY EFFECTIVE AT
NOTIFYING PEOPLE THAT SOME
THINGS ARE HAPPENING IN YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> I WILL ALSO TELL YOU TO A
CONVERSATION ABOUT EARLY
FEEDBACK OFTENTIMES WHEN YOU
LOOK AT THOSE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETINGS THEY ARE
HAPPENING TEN DAYS OR TWO WEEKS
PRIOR TO THEM SUBMITTING AN
APPLICATION TO US AND YOU ARE
NOT SEEING A LOT OF EVOLUTION
OF THOSE PLANS IN THAT TIME
FRAME.
LASTLY, AS FAR AS THE THE CITY
GOALS, I KNOW THAT'S BEEN A
FRUSTRATION POINT ON BOTH LIKE
I KNEW FROM NUMEROUS FACETS
OF LIKE SUSTAINABILITY MEASURES
AND WHAT OUR REQUIREMENTS ARE
PROJECTS WE HAVE BEEN
ENDEAVORING TO MAKE SURE WE'RE
BRINGING OUR SIDE STAFF TO THE
EARLIEST CONVERSATIONS THAT WE
HAVE WITH PETITIONERS WHERE WE
ARE TRYING TO CONNECT THEM WITH
SORT OF OUR SIZE STAFF IS SORT
OF ALMOST BUILT IN FREE
CONSULTANTS TO BRAINSTORM THESE
IDEAS AS EARLY IN THE PROCESS
IS THAT WE WE CAN ENGAGE THEM
IN THOSE THINGS.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO I'M NOT
SAYING THAT THAT'S THE ONLY WAY
OR THE BEST WAY BUT I DIDN'T
WANT THAT TO I DIDN'T WANT THAT
COMMENT FROM YOU, COMMISSIONER
MILLS TO SORT OF LINGER THAT WE
ARE NOT TRYING TO BRING THOSE
ASPECTS TO PROJECTS AS EARLY AS
WE CAN IN SOME SORT OF METHOD.
>> THANK YOU, MR LUNNER.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
SO I THINK JUST KIND
OF FOLLOWING UP ON COUNCIL
MEMBER BUSH'S COMMENTS, I THINK
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I SEE
WITH THE DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
PART OF IT IS INFORMED BY
LIVING IN BOULDER FOR SEVERAL
YEARS IS THAT ANN ARBOR IS
QUIRKY AND THE DESIGN IS QUIRKY
AND THAT IS ACTUALLY PART OF AN
ARBOR'S CHARM.
>> IT IS NOT A CITY LIKE
BOULDER WHERE THERE IS A VERY
CLEAR DESIGN ESTHETIC THAT WE
WANT TO CONFORM TO.
>> AND SO WHAT I'VE SEEN I MEAN
THE THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
HAVE BEEN REALLY GREAT IN THE
CONVERSATIONS HAVE BEEN GREAT
AND THE THE EXPERTIZE THEY
BRING IS GREAT BUT THE END
RESULT BETWEEN THE PETITIONERS
AND THE REALITY IS AND THE
SUGGESTIONS I DON'T KNOW IS
THAT MUCH BETTER FOR THE CITY
THAN IF WE HADN'T DONE THAT.
>> I I JUST THINK THAT SOME
OF AND WHETHER IT'S A BLANK
WALL OR A I MEAN WE HAVE
GUIDELINES THAT WE WILL STILL
CONFORM TO BUT I JUST JUST I'VE
NEVER YELLED AT A TV AS MUCH AS
WATCHING THOSE MEETINGS BECAUSE
IT'S LIKE NO NO WE DON'T WANT
THAT.
>> WE DON'T WANT THAT OR YES WE
DO WANT THAT LIKE I JUST THINK
DESIGN IS REALLY SUBJECTIVE AND
AND WE ARE NOT CLEAR AS A
DOWNTOWN WHAT DESIGNS WE LIKE
AND WE HAD SOME AT A FOOTBALL
GAME, SOME PEOPLE AT OUR HOUSE
AND THEY WERE TALKING ABOUT HOW
THEY LOVED ANN ARBOR BECAUSE
THERE'S EVERY BUILDING IS
DIFFERENT AND IT ALL LOOKS
DIFFERENT AND IT'S SO COOL
BECAUSE IT'S NOT COOKIE CUTTER
AND AND I DO THINK SOMETIMES
WHAT WE BRING OUT OF A BIG
COMMITTEE IS ALMOST MORE COOKIE
CUTTER THAN IF WE HAD JUST WHAT
A DEVELOPER DO WHAT THEY WANTED
TO DO.
>> AND I HATE TO SAY THAT
BECAUSE I KNOW THAT'S THE
OPPOSITE OF WHAT PEOPLE WANT
BUT IT'S IT'S SOMETIMES WHEN WE
GO FOR A CERTAIN YOU KNOW, WE
WE SAY WE CAN'T HAVE THIS
MATERIAL OR THIS DESIGN OR WE
HAVE TO REFLECT ON WHAT THE
INDIVIDUAL PEOPLE ON THESE
COMMITTEES AGREE ON.
>> IT ENDS UP NOT BEING AS
DIFFERENT, AS QUIRKY AS FORWARD
THINKING AS OF THE TIME AS
MAYBE IF WE ACTUALLY DO WANT IN
HINDSIGHT BECAUSE THINGS
CHANGE, TIMES CHANGE AND THESE
BUILDINGS REFLECT WHAT THEY
ARE.
>> SO I GUESS FOR ME I WOULD
SAY THAT WE'VE TRIED THE DESIGN
GUIDELINES, THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD AND IT'S NOT A LOT
OF DEVELOPMENT.
>> IT'S NOT A LOT OF AND MAYBE
NOW IS THE TIME TO SAY WE'VE
TRIED IT, WE'VE DONE GOOD WORK.
>> THEY'VE DONE GREAT WORK BUT
I DON'T KNOW THAT WE NEED IT
ANYMORE.
I THINK WE HAVE DIFFERENT
DIFFERENT THINGS THAT WE WANT
TO ACHIEVE OUT OF THE LIMITED
TIME WE HAVE.
>> SO GOT TO THANK YOU
COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER IT DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
FOLKS WITH COMMENTS ON THIS
PARTICULAR ITEM?
>> YES, COMMISSIONER.
I JUST ASK IF THERE ARE TWO
OF THESE HAPPENING A YEAR HOW
MANY PROJECTS ARE THEY HOTELS?
>> WHAT ARE THE KINDS
OF PROJECTS THEY DO APPLY TO
AND HOW MANY TOTAL DO WE HAVE A
YEAR IS THIS A VERY SMALL
PERCENTAGE OF THEM OR IS THAT
MOST OF THE BIG PROJECTS?
>> UM, SO IT IS LIKE FOR
EXAMPLE SEVEN TWENTY ONE S FOR
SOME OF YOU MAY REMEMBER THAT
WAS NOT SUBJECT TO DESIGN
REVIEW BECAUSE IT WASN'T IN
DEEP WATER ZONING DISTRICT.
SO IT IS IT TENDS TO BE LARGER
SCALE PROJECTS THAT ARE
DOWNTOWN NOT IN HISTORIC
DISTRICT.
SO WE GET SIZABLE PROJECTS
OUTSIDE OF THAT THAT IT DOESN'T
APPLY TO BRIARWOOD.
NOW THAT'S A SIZABLE PROJECT
NOT IN THAT DISTRICT.
SO YEAH, I GUESS I DON'T KNOW
HOW TO ANSWER THAT QUESTION
WHAT THE REQUIREMENTS ARE FOR
WHEN IT'S VOTE.
YEAH, WELL COMMISSIONER AND
PERHAPS I CAN HELP WITH A
LITTLE BIT THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD ACTUALLY ONCE TO WAS FOR
THE VIC S PROJECT WHICH IS ON S
UNIVERSITY.
IT'S RIGHT ON E UNIVERSITY AND
THE COMMENTS THAT I ACTUALLY
HEARD IT THAT ONE WAS HEY WE
WANT TO PRESERVE WE WANT TO SEE
SOME TYPE OF DIFFERENTIATING
MATERIAL LIKE A TERRACOTTA OR
SOME KIND OF AN ARCHWAY THAT
EMULATES THE FEELING OF THE
STUDENTS COMING THROUGH THE
ARCHES AND SO AND THIS IS I
THINK THEY'RE COMING OUT
OF LIKE W HALL E SO YOU'RE
COMING OUT OF LIKE THE NAVAL
ARCHITECTURE COMPLEX SYSTEMS
AREA.
YOU'RE GOING THROUGH THE UGLY
AND YOU'RE COMING ON TO S
UNIVERSITY.
AND SO I ACTUALLY THOUGHT THAT
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD IN THAT
PARTICULAR INSTANCE WAS PRETTY
EFFECTIVE AT TELLING THEM, HEY,
YOU KNOW, YOU SHOULD THINK
ABOUT THE STUDENT EXPERIENCE.
>> THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE FOR THE
NEXT CENTURY ESSENTIALLY.
>> AND SO THEY ACTUALLY DID
AGREE TO IT.
IT'S BUILT IT'S GOT A
DISTINGUISHING CORNER AS YOU'RE
COMING OUT OF THAT ARCHWAY.
>> SO THAT'S THE ONE PROJECT
THAT I'VE ACTUALLY SAID THAT I
THINK THAT THERE WAS SOME KIND
OF AN EFFECTIVE CHANGE THAT
CAME OUT OF IT NOW.
>> BUT AS YOU'VE HEARD ALSO
IT'S VERY LIMITED IN SCOPE IN
TERMS OF THE APPLICABLE
PRODUCTS TO A YEAR OR SO AND
IT'S KIND OF STRANGE BECAUSE
LIKE SEVEN TWENTY ONE MAYBE
VERY OR OR BRIGHT I DON'T KNOW.
>> BUT AS FAR AS IT'S REALLY
BALANCING AGAIN THE TENSION
BETWEEN EFFICIENCY DO WE DO WE
HAVE IT LIKE HOW EFFECTIVE CAN
IT BE?
>> I HAVE SEEN IT BE EFFECTIVE
.
>> IT IS ALSO THEIR EXPERTS.
RIGHT.
AND THEY'RE THEIR OWN RIGHT.
I HAVE A GREAT DEAL OF RESPECT
FOR WENDY FOR KIRK FOLKS WHO
HAVE BEEN A PART OF THAT
PROCESS AND SO BUT REALLY COMES
DOWN TO HOW EFFECTIVE IS IT?
IS IT CAUSING AN UNNECESSARY
BURDEN AND IS IT APPLICABLE IN
THE RIGHT WAYS THAT WE WANT IT
TO BE?
>> I WITH ALL OF THAT SAID,
HOPEFULLY THAT ANSWERS YOUR
QUESTION ABOUT LIKE HOW I'VE
SEEN IT BE AT LEAST ACTIVE OR
BEEN IMPACTED.
>> DOES I'M COMING TO THIS
LATE?
I'M NOT I WASN'T PART OF ANY
OF THE CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THIS
BEFORE SO I'M TRYING TO COME UP
TO SPEED QUICKLY AND I DO KNOW
I HAVE HEARD THAT ANN ARBOR IS
A FRUSTRATING PLACE TO DEVELOP
BECAUSE THERE ARE SO MANY HOOPS
THAT YOU HAVE TO HOP THROUGH.
I WONDER IF THIS IS JUST KIND
OF A ONE OFF THAT WE'RE TRYING
TO HAVE THERE BEEN STUDIES ARE
WE IN THE PROCESS OF EVALUATING
ALL OF THE STUFF TOGETHER
THAT'S CAUSING ALL OF THE
DELAYS AND TRYING TO DO THAT IN
A THOUGHTFUL SYSTEMATIC WAY OR
IS THIS JUST KIND OF A ONE
LET'S KILL THIS ONE.
OH, AND KIND OF NOT DEAL WITH
THE REST OF THE THINGS.
I'M TRYING TO JUST GET A SENSE
OF WHERE THIS FITS INTO THAT
LARGER EFFORT.
>> YEAH, I COULD LOOK AT IF YOU
LOOK AT SOME OF THOSE
RESOLUTIONS IT'S IT'S BEING
THOUGHT IT'S BEING APPROACHED
IN A SYSTEMATIC WAY.
BUT I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR
LIKE PART OF THE REASON FOR
THIS ONE IS SOME OF YOU
RECENTLY RECEIVED EMAIL SAYING
HEY, ARE YOU INTERESTED IN
CONTINUING TO SERVE ON THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND WE WERE
SENDING THAT OUT TO THE DESIGN
OF THE BOARD AND I THOUGHT JUST
OUT OF FAIRNESS TO THEM IN THIS
DIRECTION, MAYBE THIS IS ONE
THAT WE COULD GET STARTED ON.
>> BUT THERE IS A WHOLE SERIES
OF RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WILL BE
WE'LL BE APPROACHING AS WELL.
>> SOME OF THE OTHER ONES IN
THAT RESOLUTION ARE AS I TALKED
ABOUT STREAMLINING THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS TO MAKE
THAT MORE CONCURRENT WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS.
THAT'S LIKE I SAID IT'S I THINK
EMPHASIZING NOTIFICATION MORE
SO THAN FEEDBACK.
THERE ARE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
ELIMINATE PUBLIC HEARINGS
REQUIREMENTS AS PART OF SITE
PLANS.
THOSE ARE SOMETHING THAT WE DO
HERE BUT THAT'S NOT REQUIRED BY
STATUTE AND THEN THERE ARE MORE
COMPLEX RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT
UM WE HAVE A PRETTY HIGH WE
HAVE A PRETTY HIGH EXPECTATION
TO GET SOMETHING TO THIS TABLE
AND GET IT APPROVED.
>> WE ASK FOR A HIGHER DEGREE
OF DETAIL WORK THAN MAYBE SOME
OTHER COMMUNITIES REQUIRE AND
SO THAT ADDS A SIGNIFICANT COST
BARRIER TO GET TO THIS POINT
AND IT ALSO HAS A BIT OF A SELF
SORTING OF WHO CAN PARTICIPATE
IN THAT PROCESS AND WHO CAN
PARTICIPATE IN THAT PROCESS.
THAT'S GOING TO BE A MUCH MORE
COMPLEX PROCESS IMPROVEMENT
BECAUSE IT'S GOING TO BE
EVERYTHING.
IT'S ONE THING FOR ME TO
ADDRESS IN THE ADC BUT IT'S
GOING TO HAVE REPERCUSSIONS TO
OUR STORMWATER DESIGN AND OUR
UTILITY ANALYSIS AND OUR ROAD
NETWORK.
SO SO THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
TO LOOK AT.
SO SO BOTH THIS ONE IS PRETTY
WELL HOUSED IN THE UDC WHICH IS
SOMETHING THAT I THINK THIS
BOARD IN THE CITY COUNCIL AND
CONSIDER IT MORE INDEPENDENTLY
BUT THERE IS A LOT OF OTHER
WORK TO BE.
>> THANK YOU, MR. LUNNER.
ANYTHING ELSE, COMMISSIONER?
I'M GOING TO TRY TO TEASE OUT
KIND OF WHAT I'M HEARING RIGHT
NOW WHERE WE'RE AT.
>> SO I ACTUALLY HEARD FROM
COMMISSIONER APRON'S THERE WAS
SOME I WANT TO ACTUALLY FOCUS
ON THE EFFORTS AND THE
MATERIALITY COMPONENT OF IT
SEPARATE TO THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD JUST FROM LIKE A SENSE
OF LIKE HEY, CAN WE GET SOME
LEGIBILITY ON HOW PEOPLE FEEL
ABOUT THAT PARTICULAR PORTION
AND WHETHER WE SHOULD TEASE IT
OUT?
>> COULD I GET SOME FEEDBACK ON
WHERE WE STAND ON THAT
MATERIALITY COUNCIL MEMBER DESH
I WOULD I ACTUALLY WANTED TO
ASK COMMISSIONER MILLS IF THE
LONGEVITY OF VINYL IS A GOOD
THING BECAUSE THE BUILDINGS
THAT IT'S COVERED WITH LAST
LONG OR IS BAD BECAUSE WHEN IT
GOES INTO THE LANDFILL IT LASTS
FOREVER.
I AM NOT A VINYL SIDING EXPERT
AND THIS WAS HOTLY DEBATED IN
OUR HOUSE I SO THIS IS WHAT I
UNDERSTAND THAT IT CAN BE
RECYCLED SO IT IS PLASTIC
RIGHT?
>> I MEAN IT'S A KIND OF I MEAN
I DON'T I'M NOT A CHEMIST
EITHER BUT IT'S THAT THE
MAINTENANCE THAT IS REQUIRED
REGULARLY YOU DON'T HAVE TO
REPLACE IT AS MUCH.
AND IN TERMS OF MANUFACTURING
COMPARED TO OTHER COVERINGS
THAT ARE MANUFACTURED, GREAT.
>> OK, THAT CLARIFIES SO AGAIN
I IT HAS BEEN A STEADY DRUMBEAT
THAT I HAVE HEARD IN MY TIME ON
COUNCIL FROM MORE THAN ONE
STAFF MEMBER THAT THE MORE WE
REGULATE THE MORE WE RAISE
PRICE AND MAYBE I WOULD THINK
THAT IF THIS ISN'T VERY PRETTY
BUT OTHER PEOPLE HAVE TOLD ME
THAT IT HAS EVOLVED AND SO I
THINK FEWER REGULATIONS ON
MATERIALS AND THOSE ARE SOME
OF THE THINGS THAT WHEN STAFF
REVIEWS THINGS, IF THERE'S
SOMETHING THAT LOOKS REALLY
AWFUL OR IS GOING TO BE REALLY
OUT OF CONTEXT, STAFF CAN
SUGGEST, YOU KNOW, MAYBE YOU
COULD DO THAT A LITTLE
DIFFERENTLY.
PLANNING STAFF I MEAN OR I MEAN
THAT IS KIND OF WHAT THEY DO SO
I WOULD PREFER TO MAKE THINGS
SIMPLER AND NOT MICROMANAGE ALL
THE THINGS THAT WE CAN THINK
OF TO MICROMANAGE.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
APRON'S IS THAT ACCURATE?
THE PLANNING STAFF IS GOING TO
LOOK AT MATERIAL CHOICES ON A
FACADE AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR CHANGING THEM SO THIS
DIRECTION WOULD HAVE STAFF
COMPARE THE PROJECT TO THE
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND REPORT
THAT WE COMPARE OUR MATERIALS
NOW THAT'S PART OF THE DESIGN.
>> RIGHT?
SO BUT IF WE ELIMINATE I THINK
WHAT COMMISSIONER IS SUGGESTING
IS THE POSSIBILITY THAT YOU
WOULD SEE A BUILDING NOT USING
IF IS IN A NICE WAY AND SAY
HEY, THAT DOESN'T LOOK GREAT
AND I AM SUSPICIOUS THAT THAT
WOULD HAVE HAPPENED.
SO I WOULD LIKE SOME
CLARIFICATION THAT YEAH, I
DON'T THINK WE WOULDN'T HAVE A
STANDARD TO BE MEASURING IT
AGAINST THE YOU KNOW, AND YOU
DON'T HAVE AN ARCHITECT NO
FINER STUFF.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN WE DO WE DO STAFF
REPORTS AND WE WE PRESENT TO
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
>> I WANT TO BE CLEAR LIKE I
THAT COLLECTIVE EXPERTIZE IS
DIFFERENT THAN ANY INDIVIDUAL
ON OUR TEAM OR MY TEAM'S
COLLECTIVE EXPERTIZE AND I
THINK THE CONVERSATION HERE HAS
BEEN FRAMED WELL, I THINK IT'S
A QUESTION OF IS IT WORTH IT?
>> IT'S NOT TO DIMINISH THE
EXPERTIZE THAT THOSE PEOPLE ARE
BRINGING TO IT.
>> IT'S WHAT IS THE OUTCOME.
>> I IF THIS IS A FOUNDATIONAL
THAT THE DATA ON THE NUMBER
OF APPLICATIONS WAS DIDN'T SEEM
RIGHT TO ME.
AND SO WHEN I RAN A QUICK QUERY
I I'M SORRY I MUST HAVE DONE AN
ERROR.
SO YOU'RE THE PROJECTS THAT
WERE APPLIED FOR TO THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD IN LAST YEAR SIX
ELEVEN CHURCH THREE OF THREE
DETROIT ST. SIX ONE S MAIN
TWELVE 09 S UNIVERSITY SIX AND
S FOREST AND THREE ONE THREE
BRAWNE INCOURT THAT'S SIX SO MY
APOLOGIES LIKE LIKE I SAID I
WAS TRYING TO RUN A QUERY AND I
MUST HAVE GOT IT WRONG ALL
GOOD.
>> AND THEN YOUR DEFENSE YOU
DID SAY FOUR TO SIX AT THE
START SO YES COUNCIL NO DESH OK
SO THAT'S A GOOD CORRECTION.
THERE WAS SOMETHING THAT I
WANTED TO MENTION WHICH WAS OUR
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
ENVISIONS A LARGER DAEWON AND
SO A LARGER CORPS.
YEAH.
SO THEY'RE GOING TO BE MORE
THINGS THAT WOULD HAPPEN AND
ALSO WE TOOK AWAY THE
RESTRICTIONS ON D ONE YOU KNOW
WE TOOK AWAY THE I FORGOT WHAT
THEY WERE CALLED AND THEY'RE
YEAH.
AND WE CALLED THEM SOMETHING
THOUGH THE EXCEPT I FORGOT
ANYWAY IT DOESN'T MATTER.
>> YEAH WE TOOK AWAY THE FAA
RESTRICTIONS AND SO THAT'S ALSO
BEEN THAT STIMULATED MORE
PROJECTS BUT I THOUGHT I
REMEMBERED A CONVERSATION
EITHER WITH YOU OR MR.
DELACOURT WHERE IT WAS
SUGGESTED THAT SOME LEVEL
OF STAFF REVIEW COULD
INCORPORATE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT THAT ARE SPECIFIED IN THE
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES WHICH
WOULD DIRECT THAT.
BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR THE
MATERIALS TO WRITE RIGHT ARE
OUR REQUIREMENTS IN CODE .
>> YES.
AND I UNDERSTAND THAT IF WE
TAKE THEM OUT YOU WON'T BE ABLE
TO SAY DON'T USE THAT CORRECT.
>> BUT IF YOU ARE MAKING AN
ESTHETIC REVIEW OF SOMETHING
LIKE THAT JUST LIKE THE RBA
COULD TODAY, JUST LIKE THE DRP
COULD SEE WE WOULD ADJUST
TERRACOTTA OR SOME OTHER
MATERIAL AT THE ENTRY OF THIS
BUILDING AND THAT IS UP TO THE
PETITIONER TO DECIDE THAT'S A
GREAT IDEA.
I'M GOING TO DO IT OR I'M NOT
GOING TO.
>> RIGHT.
AND THAT'S PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO END UP SIGNIFICANTLY WORSE
THAN SOME OF THE THINGS THAT WE
HAVE.
>> OK, BUT IS IT JUST LOOK GOOD
GOING TO MAKE SURE IT'S
CONTRADICTORY TO ME.
>> SO YOU'RE SAYING THEY'RE
PLANNING WILL HIRE OR RETAIN A
CONSULTANT WHO IS AN ARCHITECT
WHO HAS THAT EXPERTIZE WHO
COULD TALK ABOUT TERRACOTTA
IT'S NOT WITHIN YOUR PURVIEW
AND THE DESIGN GUIDELINES ARE
OFTEN NOT THAT SPECIFIC WITH
MATERIAL.
SO THE DESIGN GUIDELINES HAVE
THINGS LIKE FENESTRATION AND
THEY HAVE VERY BAD YOU HAVE I'M
TALKING I'M TALKING ABOUT THE
DISCRETIONARY STUFF THAT THE
REVIEW BOARD DOES THAT IS NOT
BINDING.
>> THAT'S WHAT I'M TALKING
ABOUT.
OK, GOOD BINDING STUFF THAT WE
HAVE RIGHT NOW IN CODE IS YOU
CAN'T USE EFAS.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE A STREET WALL
TWO TO FOUR STORIES, OK?
>> IT HAS TO BE A STEP BACK.
BUT THE DISCRETIONARY STUFF YOU
SAID THAT IS A THAT IS A KIND
OF EXPERTIZE THAT IS NOT DOES
NOT EXIST IN THE PLANNIN STAFF
CURRENTLY.
>> BUT I I WE WE DO IT NOW WE
PRESENT A REPORT WE PRESENT A
STAFF REPORT TO YOU ABOUT
WHETHER A SITE AND MEETS OR
DOESN'T MEET THE SITE
REQUIREMENTS.
WE PRESENT A REPORT TO THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
ARTICULATING WHERE WE THINK THE
PROJECT MEETS THOSE DESIGN
GUIDELINES OR FALL SHORT
OF THOSE DESIGN GUIDELINES JUST
LIKE YOU THAT DESIGN REVIEW
BOARDS LIKE YEP STAFF YOU'VE
GOT THIS RIGHT SOMETIMES
THEY'RE LIKE NO STAFF.
I DON'T AGREE WITH HOW YOU
CONCLUDED THIS OR THAT AND SO
IT'S A VERY SIMILAR PROCESS.
THE ONLY DIFFERENCE IS AT THIS
TABLE YOU HAVE A SET OF LAWS
AND A RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE A
DECISION.
THEY HAVE THE RESPONSIBILITY TO
PROVIDE ADVICE AND THEN IT GOES
FROM THAT ROOM AT THE
DISCRETION OF THE PROPERTY
OWNER TO DECIDE IF THEY WANT TO
INCORPORATE IT OR NOT.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
>> YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
WRAP THIS UP.
YES, ALSO KIND OF FEEL LIKE TWO
DIFFERENT THINGS TO ME EVEN
THOUGH THEY'RE NOT THERE, THEY
ARE RELATED BUT I THINK I
SUPPORT THEM BOTH.
I HAVE SOME QUESTIONS A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS.
>> VERY FAST QUESTIONS.
YEAH, SURE.
SO I DO I THINK THAT THEY'VE
DONE GOOD WORK.
I THINK THAT WAS A REALLY GOOD
EXAMPLE, CHARLIE, THAT YOU
BROUGHT UP FOR THE CORNER THING
ON THE BUILDING ON SAORVIEW.
>> BUT I FEEL LIKE WE WOULD
GAIN EVEN IF IT'S SIX PROJECTS
LIKE PROBABLY THE STOP TIME
THAT GOES IN TO PREPARING FOR
THESE MEETINGS.
I MEAN THAT'S THAT'S A LOT
OF TIME WITH A LIMITED STAFF.
>> SO I AM I DON'T THINK IT
MATTERS WHETHER OR NOT I'M
SUPPORTIVE BECAUSE I THINK CITY
COUNCIL GETS FINAL SAY BUT I
WOULD VOTE YES ON THAT FOR
SURE.
>> BUT WHAT YOU JUST MENTIONED
ABOUT THESE REPORTS WITH THE
COMPARISONS WITH THAT JUST STOP
COMPLETELY SO WE KEEP THE
MATERIALS AND THEY HAVE THE
THERE'S GUIDELINES LIKE NO,
THEY SHOULD BE GIVEN TO YOU.
>> OK, OK, GOT IT ON THE
MATERIALS LIKE I'M I DON'T I
DON'T KNOW ABOUT ELIMINATING
THAT VINYL SIDING IS LIKE
REALLY TOXIC.
IT'S LIKE SEE LIKE IT'S BAD FOR
THE ENVIRONMENT TO DO IT SO
LIKE I'M FINE NO I HAVE VINYL
SIDING PUT IT IN MY HOUSE BUT
LIKE I I I DON'T KNOW THAT I'D
STRIKE IT.
>> I KIND OF DON'T WANT PEOPLE
TO LIKE PUTTING VINYL SIDING ON
BUILDINGS NOT EVEN FOR A
CATACLYSMS.
>> I THINK LIKE I AGREE WITH A
LOT OF WHAT COMMISSIONER
WETHERBEE SAID LIKE ESTHETICS.
IT'S SO SUBJECTIVE LIKE I I
DON'T WANT THERE'S ARCHITECTS
CONCEIVABLY DESIGNING THESE
PROJECTS THAT TRAINED
ARCHITECTS AND LIKE I THINK WE
CAN HAVE INPUT LIKE YOU KNOW,
JUST I HOPE THEY DON'T DESIGN
UGLY BUILDINGS BUT ALSO LIKE
I'D RATHER HAVE MORE OF WHAT WE
WANT IN TERMS OF HOUSING UNITS
THEN BE QUIBBLING OVER WHAT THE
FACADE IS MADE OF .
BUT I DON'T THINK IT'S REALLY,
REALLY BAD AND I WOULD
DEFINITELY WANT TO KEEP
PROHIBITING THAT.
>> YES, I JUST WANT TO
REITERATE THE MATERIALS CHANGES
WAS INITIATED BY STAFF IF PART
OF THE TENSION IS LIKE CONCERNS
THAT LIKE THE CONVERGENCE
OF BOTH ACTION ON THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD AND CHANGES TO
MATERIAL AND MAYBE IT'S JUST
FEELS LIKE TOO MUCH TOO
QUICKLY.
I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT
THAT JUST RE-EMPHASIZE THAT THE
MATERIAL CHANGE WAS NOT
SOMETHING SPECIFICALLY DIRECTED
BY THAT RESOLUTION.
>> IT IT DOESN'T HAVE TO
CHANGE.
OF COURSE YOU CAN RECOMMEND
WHATEVER ON ANY OF THESE
ACTIONS BUT IF IF IT FEELS LIKE
TOO MUCH TOO QUICKLY THAT WOULD
BE ANOTHER PLACE THAT YOU COULD
JUST SAY LIKE NO I WANT TO KEEP
THOSE MATERIAL RESTRICTIONS AS
THEY ARE IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
NEW PROCESS TO SEE WHERE WE END
UP.
THANK YOU.
I THINK WE'RE ACTUALLY OK.
THE ONLY QUESTION I HAVE IS
GOING TO BE ACTUALLY FROM MR.
WESTFALL WHICH IS HAVE THERE
BEEN COMMUNICATION AND
COORDINATION WITH THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD ABOUT THEIR
FEEDBACK ON HOW TO STREAMLINE?
>> HAVE THEY GIVEN ANY FEEDBACK
ON THIS PARTICULAR ITEM I MEAN
OTHER THAN WHAT THEY'VE WRITTEN
US TONIGHT?
>> YEAH, MR. FOURNIER AND MR.
GALLAGHER HAVE PRESENTED TO THE
DESIGN REPORTER THIS ACTION AND
AGAIN I DON'T THINK IT WAS
PRESENTED I DON'T THINK IT WAS
LIKE HOW COULD WE STREAMLINE IT
WAS BEING TRANSPARENT WITH THEM
ABOUT THE DIRECTION THAT THE
CITY COUNCIL HAD WAS
CONSIDERING AND DIRECTING.
SO I DIDN'T I DIDN'T ATTEND
THAT.
SO I DON'T I DON'T KNOW IF THAT
DISCUSSION WAS THERE BUT WHAT I
HAVE HEARD AND SEEN FROM THE
CORRESPONDENCES IS JUST THIS
TABLE, YOU KNOW, LIKE I THINK
PROJECTS HAVE CHANGED FROM THAT
CONVERSATION BUT THEY ARE THERE
IS EXPERTIZE THERE NOBODY'S
DISPUTING EITHER OF THOSE
THINGS.
>> THIS PROPOSED ACTION IS IS
IT WORTH IT?
>> THEY'RE STREAMLINING IT.
YEAH.
COMMISSIONER NORTON AND THEN I
THINK TO THAT ARE THE
DEVELOPERS WHO HAVE TO GO
THROUGH HE'S ASKING THAT WE GET
RID OF THIS.
ARE THEY COMPLAINING ABOUT IT?
THIS IS MY FIRST QUESTION.
AND SECONDLY FOR THOSE SIX
PROJECTS WHERE THEY WENT
THROUGH THE PROCESS, DID THAT
SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASE THE COST
OF THE PROJECT?
ARE THEY HAVING TO CHARGE
HIGHER RENTS BECAUSE THEY SPENT
A MONTH WORKING WITH THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD TO TO THOSE
CHANGES?
AND SO PART OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS IN THAT REPORT
WAS BASED ON INTERVIEWS WITH
DEVELOPERS DESIGNERS?
YES.
I AGAIN I WASN'T PART OF THOSE
BUT SO I CAN'T SIT HERE AND
QUOTE THAT DEVELOPER A C AND
SAID LIKE AND ANOTHER THING GET
RID OF THE DESIGNER REVIEW
BOARD BUT I WILL SAY LIKE TO
THE QUESTION I DON'T KNOW I
DON'T KNOW IF IT'S LIKE THE THE
DESIGN OF SAORVIEW.
I'M GUESSING THAT THAT MATERIAL
CHANGE IS PROBABLY MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN WHAT WAS
ORIGINALLY PROPOSED.
>> I THINK SO YEAH.
I THINK THAT CAN IMPACT IT.
IT MIGHT BE MARGINAL BUT I DO
THINK THAT WHEN YOU I THINK I
THINK THE PHILOSOPHY BEHIND
THIS DIRECTION IS I DON'T WANT
A NICKEL AND DIME TO MATERIAL
COSTS AIR AND A NICKEL AND DIME
TO HAVING TO EXTEND YOUR
PROCESS OF HAVING YOUR
CONSULTANCY ON BOARD FOR
ANOTHER MONTH A NICKEL AND DIME
FOR ANOTHER APPLICATION FEE.
>> THOSE THINGS DO ADD UP TO
INCREASED COST MARKET MARKETS
ARE COMPLEX.
I DON'T WANT TO SIT HERE AND
SAY LIKE ELIMINATING THIS IS
GOING TO HAVE THAT THAT THOSE
UNITS IN VICRYL ITSELF WOULD
HAVE BEEN CHEAPER WITHOUT THAT.
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW THAT BUT I
CAN TELL YOU THAT IT'S MORE
EXPENSIVE.
>> THE PROCESS TAKES LONGER.
IF I COULD JUST YES.
INTO THE MIKE IF I COULD JUST
OBSERVING I TOTALLY UNDERSTAND
THE DESIRE TO SIMPLIFY THE
BUILDING PROCESS IN AMBER AND
BRING DOWN THE COSTS AND ALL
THE STRUGGLES WE'RE DEALING
WITH.
BUT THINGS ARE GETTING BUILT
THAT ARE GOING TO LAST A REALLY
LONG TIME AND I TOTALLY
UNDERSTAND THAT DESIGN IS IN
THE EYE OF THE BEHOLDER AND
DIFFERENT PEOPLE HAVE DIFFERENT
TASTES.
THERE'S SOME REALLY UGLY STUFF
.
IT'S BEEN BUILT IN THE CITY
THAT WE'RE STUCK WITH FOR A
REALLY LONG TIME
.
AND SO THE IDEA OF HAVING SOME
KIND OF MOMENT TO STOP AT LEAST
ASK A DEVELOPER COULDN'T YOU DO
IT A LITTLE BIT BETTER?
THIS IS GOING TO BE SOMETHING
THAT WE'RE GOING TO LIVE WITH
FOR A REALLY LONG TIME LONG
AFTER YOU'RE GONE.
IT'S STRIKING ME IS LIKE THIS
IS FOR A FAIRLY SMALL RETURN IN
THE COST RECOGNIZING NICKELS
AND DIMES ADD UP IT SEEMS LIKE
LIKE A RADICAL THING TO DO.
IT'S KIND OF THROWING OUT THE
BABY WITH THE BATHWATER IS WHAT
IT SEEMED LIKE TO ME SAYING
THAT I KNOW THAT THERE'S BEEN A
WHOLE LOT OF DISCUSSION BEFORE
I GOT HERE SO I'M A LITTLE BIT
RETICENT TO THROW BOMBS NOW
BECAUSE I WASN'T PART OF THOSE
EARLIER CONVERSATIONS.
>> SO I'M STRUGGLING WITH THE
SCIENCE.
I'M SURE AND I THINK WHAT'S
WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO ENSURE
THAT THIS IS CLEAR IS THAT
THESE THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
IS ELECTIVE AND IT'S A
SUGGESTION, RIGHT?
IT'S NOT MANDATORY.
>> AND SO IF THERE IS A
PRESERVATION OF DESIGN
DIVIDENDS OR ARCHITECTURAL
DIVIDENDS THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
PRESERVE FOR THE COMMUNITY, IT
HAS TO BE CODIFIED RATHER THAN
THROUGH THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD.
AND SO I THINK THERE'S ALSO AN
ELEMENT THAT THERE IS
COMPOUNDING AGAINST STAFF
ALLOCATION OF TIME AND THINGS
OF THAT NATURE.
>> SO I THINK WHEN YOU WEIGH
ALL OF THAT, I THINK THE REASON
THAT WE ARE HAVING SOME LEVEL
OF CONSTERNATION IS BECAUSE
IT'S NOT AN EASY DECISION ONE
WAY OR THE OTHER.
>> SO BUT JUST WANTED TO MAKE
SURE THAT IT'S NOT MANDATORY
CURRENTLY RIGHT.
>> SHINOHARA DID NOT HAVE TO
CHANGE THAT DESIGN AND RON
DIDN'T HAVE TO CHANGE THAT
DESIGN.
BUT I THINK THEY DID BECAUSE
THEY WERE LIKE, YOU KNOW,
ACTUALLY FOR LONGEVITY IT
PROBABLY MAKES SENSE FOR THE
BUILDING AND IT'S BEEN BUILT.
SO I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
THAT AND SO COMMISSIONER BEING
COUNCIL MEMBER DECIDED YOU WANT
TO ADD TO THAT AT ALL START
WITH COUNCIL MEMBER THEN I JUST
WANT TO ANSWER MR. LEONARD'S
QUESTION IS THIS TOO MUCH TOO
FAST?
I WANT TO SAY NO.
IT'S TOO LITTLE AND TOO SLOW.
I'M JUST I HAVE I DON'T HAVE
ANY MORE TIME I'M GOING TO BE,
YOU KNOW, 65 SOON.
I WOULD LIKE ANN ARBOR TO MEET
ITS CLIMATE GOALS.
>> I I JUST LEANED ON A
DEVELOPER TO PUT HIS SOLAR ON
HIS ROOF NOW BECAUSE WE CAN'T
WAIT I JUST I WOULD LIKE TO
MOVE FORWARD.
I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE SOME
CHANGES THAT CHANGE THE WAY WE
DO BUSINESS HERE AND IT'S OK IF
OTHERS HAVE RESERVATIONS THAT'S
TOTALLY OK.
BUT I'M JUST STATING MY STRONG
POSITION.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
WETHERBEE WITH THE FINAL
COMMENT.
>> I THINK ONE THING IS I KNOW
MR. LEONARD, DO YOU KNOW WHEN
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD WAS
ESTABLISHED BECAUSE I KNOW IT'S
BEEN AROUND THE FIRST PROJECT I
REALLY WAS AFFILIATED WITH
WHETHER IT WAS IN 2015.
>> SO IT HAS TO HAVE AT LEAST
BEEN BEFORE THAT IS IT 2011
WHEN WHEN THEY CREATED YOU WON
OK 2011 D1 D2 JUST FOR YEAH
COMMISSIONER WHY SO YEAH YEAH
YEAH YEAH.
>> SO MANY OF THE BUILDINGS
THAT WE HAVE THAT MAY BE THAT
ARE NEWER AND THAT WE DON'T
LIKE ACTUALLY DID GO THROUGH
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND
AGAIN I'LL GO BACK TO IT
SUBJECTIVE I DON'T LIKE THE
ROUNDNESS ON THE SEIU BUILDING
BECAUSE IT'S KIND OF CHEESY TO
ME BECAUSE THE SIDES AREN'T
ROUNDED.
>> THERE'S NOTHING IT'S JUST
LOOKS LIKE SOMEBODY THREW A
WEIRD ROUND CORBEL OR WHATEVER
ARCH BECAUSE SOMEBODY TOLD THEM
TO AND IT'S NOT THE SAME
MATERIALS AS ABOVE AND SO LIKE
SO I THINK I THINK IT JUST IS A
VERY DIFFICULT THING TO SAY
THAT THIS HAS DEFINITELY MADE
EVERYTHING BETTER.
I THINK IT IS POSSIBLY MADE
THINGS DIFFERENT.
THANK YOU WITH THAT I THINK WE
CAN ACTUALLY TAKE THESE ALL
TOGETHER SO ANY OTHER FINAL
THOUGHTS?
I'M JUST GOING TO ENTERTAIN
JUST LITERALLY FIVE SECONDS.
>> OK, WE'RE GOING TO GO TO
ROLL CALL VOTE.
I'M GOING TO READ THE MOTION
ONE MORE TIME JUST BECAUSE I
KNOW IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME AND
AGAIN AS A POINT OF PROCESS
THIS IS GOING TO CITY COUNCIL.
THE ANN ARBOR CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION HEREBY RECOMMENDS
THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE SECTION FIVE POINT ONE
SEVEN POINT SIX FIVE POINT TWO
SEVEN POINT FIVE AND FIVE POINT
TWO EIGHT POINT FIVE TO
ELIMINATE THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD MODIFY THE DESIGN REVIEW
PROCESS TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE
FUNCTION AND REVISE THE
DOWNTOWN BUILDING MATERIAL
REGULATION AS PROPOSED IN THE
ATTACHED ORDINANCE.
>> MR. COMMISSIONER GORDON,
THANKS A LOT.
>> YES HE'S GOING TO GO FIRST.
>> YES COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
YES COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE.
>> YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS NO
COMMISSIONER.
YES.
YES COMMISSIONER ABRAMS NO.
>> COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WAITES YES.
COMMISSIONER.
>> YES MARTIN KERRICK'S.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
WE ARE NOW MOVING ON TO OTHER
BUSINESS WHICH THERE ARE NONE.
>> OK, WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON
TO THE FINAL PUBLIC COMMENT
THIS IS THE SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE AND
WE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS.
>> IF YOU TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE OR RAISE
HAND ON ZOOME FOR PHONE ACCESS
PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AND INTERMEETING EIGHTY
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TO SIX CITIES THAT
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME IF AVAILABLE
AND YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT SAYING THAT IT'S
YOUR TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE
MUTE BACKGROUND NOISES AND
SPEAK QUIETLY AH I'M SORRY MUTE
BACKGROUND NOISES AND MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS.
SORRY PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME
AND ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
I APOLOGIZE.
>> IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME?
>> I TRIED DOING IT FROM MEMORY
.
YOU KNOW I NEVER MEET.
YEAH SO THANK YOU COUNCIL
MEMBER FOR PUSHING TWENTY
FIFTEEN S MAIN TO PUTTING ON SO
THERE IT DIDN'T MAKE ANY SENSE
TO ME AS I EXPRESSED FOR THEM
TO SAY WHAT WE CAN POWER THE
ENTIRE BUILDING SO I PUT ANY SO
THANKS FOR CALLING THEM OUT ON
THAT AND JUST IN GENERAL THANK
YOU ALL FOR THE THOUGHTFUL
DISCUSSION AND FOR I APPRECIATE
BEING HEARD WHEN I WHEN I COME
UP HERE AND I CLEARLY AM SO I'M
GRATEFUL FOR THAT AND IT'S NICE
TO BE BACK WITH YOU.
THANK YOU.
ANYBODY ELSE I WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME SEEING NONE
THAT'S PRESENT REMOTE CALLERS
MR. I AM GOING TO SLOWLY REPORT
BUT NO HANDS ARE RAISED OK I
ALWAYS GIVE IT THREE SECONDS OK
WHAT THAT WE WILL CLOSE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
AGENDA NUMBER TWELVE COMMISSION
POST BUSINESS.
>> ARE THERE ANY.
>> YES COMMISSIONER.
RIGHT OK FIRST THING MR. MADE
US AWARE THAT OUR AGENDA FOR
THE MARCH 11TH WORKING SESSION
IS OPEN.
I'D LIKE TO RECOMMEND THAT WE
HAVE THE LEGAL BRIEFING WITH
OUR ATTORNEY DURING THAT TIME
IF IT'S POSSIBLE UNLESS THAT
HAS TO BE AT A REGULAR MEETING.
>> WE INQUIRED ABOUT THAT
TODAY.
THE CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE
WOULD LIKE ADDITIONAL TIME FOR
THAT.
WE ASKED FOR ONE OF EITHER
MARCH 11TH OR MARCH 18TH SO I
CAN'T PROVIDE THAT IN THIS
TIMEFRAME JUST AS A BACKGROUND
WE I WAS ASSIGNED THE ATTORNEY
WE'VE GOT A RETIREMENT OUT
OF THAT OFFICE SO I CAN'T DO
THAT.
>> OK, MY SECOND THING WAS IS
IT POSSIBLE FOR PLANNING STAFF
TO PROVIDE US WITH GUIDANCE ON
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SO THE
STEERING COMMITTEE MEETINGS
HAVE BEEN CANCELED THIS
COMMITTEE MEETING HAS BEEN
CANCELED BUT WE HAVEN'T
RECEIVED MEMORANDA OR AN EMAIL
OTHER THAN IN THE CANCELATION.
THERE WAS A SMALL NOTE THAT
SAID THE PLAN WOULD BE
FORTHCOMING BY THE END OF MARCH
SO IT WOULD BE HELPFUL FOR ME
TO I'M JUST SPEAKING FOR MYSELF
TO UNDERSTAND HOW WE ARE GOING
TO EMBARK ON THIS ENDEAVOR
GIVEN THAT WE'RE NOT ACTUALLY
MEETING IN THE SUBCOMMITTEE,
WHICH IS WHERE I WOULD HAVE
ASKED THIS QUESTION AND
SPECIFICALLY WHAT I'M LOOKING
FOR IS WHETHER OR NOT THE DRAFT
PLAN THAT IS COMING AT THE END
OF MARCH WILL COME TO THE FULL
TABLE OR WILL COME TO THE
SUBCOMMITTEE WHETHER THE DRAFT
IS GOING TO BE PRESENTED IN A
WAY THAT WE CAN PROVIDE
FEEDBACK THAT MIGHT AMOUNT TO
VOTES IN TERMS OF LIKE AN
ACTUAL RECORD KEEPING OF YES,
WE LIKE THESE THINGS.
NO, WE DON'T LIKE THESE THINGS
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE THROUGH THE
PROCESS SOME OF THAT
INFORMATION HAS BEEN LEFT TO
INTERPRETATION AND I THINK THAT
INTERPRETING SHOULD AND HAS
BEEN CHALLENGING AT LEAST FROM
MY POINT VIEW.
SO ANY GUIDANCE THAT YOU COULD
PROVIDE TO US ABOUT THIS
PROCESS I THINK WOULD BE
HELPFUL JUST FOR EXPECTATIONS
AND THAT CAN COME AS AN EMAIL
OR COULD COME AS A MEMO.
I DON'T KNOW THAT WE HAVE TO
HAVE A FULL AGENDA ITEM FOR IT
BUT RIGHT NOW I JUST DON'T KNOW
AND THEN I HAVE ONE LAST THING
BUT I'LL LET YOU GO BECAUSE IT
LOOKS LIKE YOU WERE GOING TO
SAY SOMETHING MR. WE CAN DO
THAT.
OK, THANK YOU.
AND THEN FINALLY I'D LIKE TO
DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO THE
COMMENT FROM CHRIS THE CELLS IN
OUR PACKET.
HE ASKED A VERY SPECIFIC
QUESTION AND I DON'T KNOW
WHETHER SOMEONE IS GOING TO
ANSWER HIS QUESTION.
WE HAVE OK, THANK YOU.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
HE DIDN'T GET THAT QUESTION ON
ANSWER.
>> THANK YOU.
GREAT.
ANY OTHER AGENDA OR PROPOSED
ITEMS THAT TAKES US TO THE
FINAL ITEM ON OUR AGENDA WHICH
IS ADJOURNMENT MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER WAITZ SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR
.
>> HEY I I WE ARE ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU